Mentova now predicts directions without numbers. Rung 16 of 48 is accomplished.

You do not always need to know how much. Sometimes knowing which way is enough.

If more sunlight falls on a garden, does plant growth increase or decrease? Increase. You do not need to know the exact photosynthesis rate to reason correctly about the direction.

Rung 16 gives Mentova qualitative reasoning: prediction of direction without numbers.

Ask whether sunlight increases plant growth:

  answer(increases, just(increases(sunlight, plant_growth)))

Correct. And named: the increases relation between sunlight and plant_growth is explicit in the knowledge base.

Ask whether exercise increases or decreases weight:

  answer(decreases, just(decreases(exercise, weight)))

Decreases. Justified: the decreases relation is named.

Now chain two hops together. If sunlight increases temperature, and temperature increases evaporation, what does sunlight do to evaporation?

  answer(increases, just(chain(sunlight, via(temperature), evaporation, inferred(increases))))

Positive times positive equals positive. More sunlight → more temperature → more evaporation. The sign propagates through the chain. The intermediate node (temperature) is named.

Ask what happens when rainfall goes up:

  answer([flood_risk-increases, soil_moisture-increases, drought_risk-decreases],
         just(predict(rainfall, up, changes([...]))))

All effects in one query. Flood risk up. Soil moisture up. Drought risk down. Every directional change named.

The qualitative multiplication table: pos × pos = pos, pos × neg = neg, neg × neg = pos. This is the algebra of directions — the same sign rules that govern causal chain reasoning in qualitative physics.

With qualitative reasoning in place, Mentova can answer directional questions about systems it has never numerically modelled. A doctor saying "if you exercise more, your weight will decrease" does not need to know the exact caloric deficit. A farmer saying "if it rains more, the drought risk falls" does not need a hydrology simulation.

Direction is often enough. Mentova now knows direction.

The code is open. The reasoning is readable. The mind is growing.

https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova
https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova. Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758. (https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/)
