Mentova now reasons about suppositions without committing to them. Rung 20 of 48 is accomplished.

"Suppose we start a fire. What follows?"

This is not an assertion that there is a fire. It is a temporary supposition — a question about what would follow if we suppose fire to be true, without adding fire to our knowledge of the world.

A mind that cannot hold a supposition without committing to it cannot think ahead. It cannot evaluate plans. It cannot explore ideas. It can only reason about what it believes to be true.

Rung 20 gives Mentova hypothetical reasoning: the ability to reason from a supposition without asserting it.

Ask: suppose fire — what follows?

  answer(consequents(fire, [smoke]),
         just(hypothetical(suppose(fire),
                            derived_without_kb_pollution([smoke]),
                            note('KB unchanged; supposition is temporary'))))

Supposition: fire is true (temporarily).
Consequence: smoke (via causes(fire, smoke)).
Note: KB unchanged. Supposition is temporary.

The knowledge base is not modified. Fire is not in the KB. Smoke is not added to the KB. The derivation lives only in the query result.

The justification says so explicitly: "derived without KB pollution." You can verify this with a second query:

  mentova_query(hypothetical, verify_kb_intact(fire), R)
  → answer(kb_intact, ...)

Fire was never asserted. The KB is clean.

This is the difference between hypothetical and counterfactual reasoning:
  — Counterfactual (Rung 19): what if the actual world had been different?
  — Hypothetical (Rung 20): what follows if we suppose this, without claiming it?

And both differ from causal reasoning (Rung 6):
  — Causal: what does a real intervention produce?
  — Hypothetical: what does a temporary supposition suggest?

Hypothetical reasoning is the substrate for safe deliberation. When Mentova plans (Rung 38), it will hypothetically evaluate each candidate action before committing to one. When it forms a scientific hypothesis (Rung 26), it will test that hypothesis hypothetically before asserting it.

Suppose. Derive. Do not pollute. Choose.

The code is open. The reasoning is readable. The mind is growing.

https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova
https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator of PrologAI and Mentova. Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758. (https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/)
