Mentova now distinguishes doing from seeing. Rung 6 of 48 is accomplished.

There is a difference between observing that your umbrella is wet and deciding to pour water on it. One is a sign of rain; the other is a deliberate act. A mind that cannot tell the difference will confuse correlation with causation every time.

Rung 6 gives Mentova causal reasoning: the ability to distinguish an observation from an intervention.

Ask Mentova: if we observe the sprinkler is on, how likely is the ground wet?

  answer(0.72, just(observation(sprinkler, wet_ground, 0.72,
                     note('no edge severing; all paths to Effect included'))))

0.72. The observation correlates with the rainy season. Sprinklers tend to be used when it might rain anyway. Both rain and the sprinkler contribute to the wet ground.

Now ask: if we force the sprinkler on — a deliberate intervention — how likely is the ground wet?

  answer(0.9, just(intervention(do(sprinkler), wet_ground, 0.9,
                    note('incoming edges to Cause severed; only causal path retained'))))

0.90. The intervention severs the incoming edge from the rain-season correlation. We have cut the sprinkler loose from any confounding factor. Only the direct causal path sprinkler → wet_ground remains.

Intervention probability: 0.90. Observation probability: 0.72. Difference: 0.18.

That gap is what causation looks like. That gap is why randomised controlled trials differ from observational studies. That gap is what Judea Pearl's do-calculus formalises — and what Mentova now implements, glass-box, with a justification that names the edge-severing operation.

The justification reads: "incoming edges to Cause severed; only causal path retained."

No hidden assumption. No silent confounding. Auditable.

Mentova can also trace the downstream causal chain from any cause. Ask it what fire causes:

  answer(chain(fire, [smoke]), just(causal_chain(fire, [smoke])))

Fire causes smoke. One direct hop. Read from named causes/2 facts in the Small-World knowledge base.

This rung is the foundation for planning, policy evaluation, and experiment design — all of which require knowing what will happen when you act, not merely when you observe.

Next: Rung 7, Statistical Reasoning — finding patterns in the observation table.

The code is open. The reasoning is readable. The mind is growing.

https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova
https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova. Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758. (https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/)
