Mentova now reasons through contradiction. Rung 18 of 48 is accomplished.

In classical logic, a single contradiction destroys everything. From "A is true" and "A is false," you can prove anything — absolutely anything. This is called explosion (ex contradictione quodlibet). It means that a knowledge base with even one contradiction becomes useless.

The real world contains contradictions. Not theoretical ones — real ones. Two sensors disagree. Two witnesses give inconsistent accounts. A default rule and an exception both apply to the same entity.

A mind that explodes on contradiction cannot function in the real world.

Rung 18 gives Mentova paraconsistent reasoning: the ability to contain contradictions without explosion.

The Small-World knowledge base contains a deliberate contradiction about tweety. By the bird default, tweety flies. By the flightless exception, tweety does not fly. Both conclusions are derivable from the facts. This is a real contradiction.

Ask Mentova to check flies(tweety):

  answer(both, just(paraconsistent(flies(tweety), tag(both), isolated(yes))))

Tag: both. The contradiction is acknowledged. It is tagged, labelled, and isolated.

Now ask about flies(canary) — completely unrelated to tweety:

  answer(true, just(paraconsistent_isolation(
                     contradiction(flies(tweety), both),
                     unrelated(flies(canary), true),
                     explosion_avoided)))

flies(canary) is true, unaffected, and the justification explicitly states: explosion_avoided.

The contradiction for tweety does not propagate. It does not infect canary. It does not infect the rest of the knowledge base. It sits in its quarantine, labelled, auditable, correctable.

This is the critical difference between paraconsistent reasoning and classical reasoning in the presence of contradictions. Classical logic collapses. Paraconsistent logic continues.

Every real AI system that reads data from the world must handle this. Medical records contain contradictions. Legal documents contain contradictions. News databases contain contradictions. A mind that can reason through them rather than collapse on them is a mind that can function in the real world.

The code is open. The reasoning is readable. The mind is growing.

https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova
https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova. Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758. (https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/)
