Mentova now reasons about worlds that did not happen. Rung 19 of 48 is accomplished.

It did not rain today. The ground is dry. That is the actual world.

But what if it had rained?

This is a counterfactual question — a question about a world that differs from the actual world in a specific respect. The answer is not a lookup. It is a derivation in the alternative world: if rain had occurred, then by causes(rain, wet_ground), the ground would be wet.

Rung 19 gives Mentova counterfactual reasoning.

Ask: what if it had rained today — would the ground be wet?

  answer(yes, just(counterfactual(
                    antecedent(rains_today_yes),
                    query(ground_wet),
                    actual(no),
                    counterfactual(yes),
                    mechanism(causes(rain, wet_ground)),
                    differs(yes))))

Actual: no. Counterfactual: yes. Mechanism: causes(rain, wet_ground). Differs: yes.

The justification shows everything:
  — What the antecedent is (it rained today)
  — What the actual answer is (ground not wet)
  — What the counterfactual answer is (ground would be wet)
  — What mechanism produces the counterfactual (causes relation)
  — Whether the two answers differ (yes — pass criterion)

Ask: what if the penguin were not flightless — would it fly?

  answer(yes, just(counterfactual(antecedent(penguin_not_flightless),
                                   query(penguin_flies), actual(no),
                                   counterfactual(yes), ...)))

Yes. If the penguin were not flightless, it would fly. The actual answer is no. The counterfactual answer is yes. They differ — correctly.

Counterfactual reasoning is at the top of Pearl's causal hierarchy: above observation (Rung 4), above intervention (Rung 6). To reason counterfactually is to reason about causation in the most powerful sense: not just what happened, not just what would happen if you acted, but what would have happened if the world had been different.

This is how moral responsibility is attributed. This is how policy counterfactuals are evaluated. This is how a mind asks the deepest causal question: was this necessary?

The code is open. The reasoning is readable. The mind is growing.

https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova
https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova. Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758. (https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/)
