MENTOVA CHAT - DOCUMENT 6 - DEMONSTRATION - VERSION 2


Purpose.


This document gives a short walkthrough that shows the feature working, suitable for showing to another person.


It is updated whenever the code changes.


Before the demonstration.


Start the server: bash bin/mentova_chat_start.sh 8080
Open http://localhost:8080 in a browser.
Confirm the public chat page loads with the notice "This is a learning machine. This conversation is recorded."


The walkthrough.


Step 1.  Open the chat page as a public visitor.
Show the plain notice that this is a learning machine and that the chat is recorded.


Step 2.  Type: "Is a dog a mammal?"
Mentova replies: "Yes, dog is a mammal."
The Why? link appears next to the reply.


Step 3.  Click Why?
The justification panel opens: "I know this directly: is_a(dog, mammal) is in my knowledge base."
This is the glass-box property: every answer traces back to a named fact, not a statistical guess.


Step 4.  Type: "Is a rock a bird?"
Mentova replies: "I have not learned whether rock is a bird yet, so I do not want to guess."
No answer is invented.  This is the honest-ignorance property.


Step 5.  Type: "What is a dog?"
Mentova replies with all known facts: "Here is what I know about dog: dog is a mammal; dog has property fur; dog can bark; ..."
Each fact traces to a named small_world entry.


Step 6.  Type: "I really LOVE dogs!"
The word LOVE appears in small-caps in the reply context, showing focus prosody detection.
An excited tone badge appears because of the exclamation mark, showing emotional prosody detection.


Step 7.  Open http://localhost:8080/mentor in a browser.
Enter the mentor username and password and click Sign in.
The workspace appears with the chat panel, Teach panel, and Review Queue.
Type "is_a(robin, bird)" in the Teach field and click Propose.
The status reads "Proposed (Queue ID 1). Awaiting approval before entering the knowledge base."
The Review Queue shows the entry with an Approve button.
Click Approve.
The entry disappears from the queue.
Now typing "Is a robin a bird?" in the chat returns "Yes, robin is a bird." - the fact has entered the knowledge base.


Step 8.  Open the data/chat_db/mentova_chat.db file (or query via the Prolog top level).
Show that every message from all sessions was recorded with its time, session, tier, and speaker.


What the demonstration proves.


It proves the heart of the project: that Mentova grounds its words, justifies its answers, admits ignorance honestly, reads written emphasis and tone, teaches only through review-gated acquisition, and records everything.


Governing sources.


This document follows the acceptance conversations in Appendix I and the setup manual in Appendix G of the master plan.


VERSION 2 ADDITION - THE FACT REFINERY (Acc_425, 2026-07-10).


Demonstration walkthrough: run demos/fact_refinery_demo.pl. It builds a three-sentence scratch corpus, registers it as a library source, and refines it: the Peace of Westphalia fact (Appendix R's own example) qualifies as testimonial and survives to the high lane; the ball-is-round fact qualifies as direct; the moon fact is unanimously endorsed by the panel yet rejected by the plain-code honesty gate because its subject is not yet a grounded concept; a split vote lands in the Minority Report Bin where the referee keeps it; the survivor enters the chat Review Queue; approval grounds it with full provenance; and fr_why answers with the record, the votes, and the checks.
