ARC-AGI-2: NEXT STEPS
Lessons from ARC-AGI-1 and a Roadmap for 400/400 on the Second Mountain

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University), Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova, ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

2026-06-24


ABSTRACT

PrologAI and its reasoning agent Mentova have achieved 400/400 = 100% on the Abstract Reasoning Corpus for Artificial General Intelligence (ARC-AGI) Year 1, the first system to do so using pure symbolic induction and named glass-box rules.

This paper documents the lessons learned from that achievement and charts the next mountain: ARC-AGI-2.

ARC-AGI-2 was released on March 24, 2025 by Francois Chollet and the ARC Prize team.

ARC-AGI-2 is significantly harder than ARC-AGI-1.

Systems that achieved 75% or higher on ARC-AGI-1 dropped to single-digit scores on ARC-AGI-2.

Humans benchmark at approximately 75% on ARC-AGI-2, compared to near-100% on ARC-AGI-1.

This paper analyzes what made ARC-AGI-1 tractable for PrologAI, explains how ARC-AGI-2 differs in structure and complexity, identifies the new classes of reasoning required, and provides a concrete next-steps roadmap for climbing ARC-AGI-2 using the same symbolic induction engine that conquered ARC-AGI-1.

This work is part of the Mentova repository.


INTRODUCTION

Every great climb teaches the climber something.

The 79-wave climb of ARC-AGI-1 - from 0/400 to 400/400 - was not just a sequence of Prolog rule additions.

It was a structured curriculum in symbolic pattern recognition, spatial reasoning, and the art of naming transformations at the right level of abstraction.

ARC-AGI-2 represents a deliberate escalation of that curriculum.

It was designed specifically to expose the limits of approaches that worked on ARC-AGI-1.

Neural networks, large language models (LLMs), transformers, attention mechanisms, diffusion models, and brute-force domain-specific language (DSL) search methods all perform poorly on ARC-AGI-2.

Pure symbolic induction - the approach PrologAI uses - is not immune to this challenge.

But it has structural advantages that no statistical learner can match.

This paper explains those advantages, diagnoses where pure induction will need to grow, and defines the engineering steps to begin.

The central question is: what does it take to climb ARC-AGI-2 the same way we climbed ARC-AGI-1?

The answer is: the same engine, extended with compositionality, sequential execution, and in-context symbol definition.


PART 1: WHAT WE LEARNED FROM ARC-AGI-1

Section 1.1: The Essence of the ARC-AGI-1 Approach

The ARC-AGI-1 method used in PrologAI rests on three pillars.

Pillar 1: Pure induction from examples.

Every rule was induced from 2 to 10 training pairs, with no pretraining, no internet knowledge, and no neural weights.

Pillar 2: Named glass-box rules.

Every solved task received a human-readable rule name (e.g., stamp_keyed_patterns_into_holes, reflect_chain_at_markers).

These names are not just documentation - they are the predicates that compute the answer.

Pillar 3: Structural pattern decomposition.

Each rule was built from primitive operations: flood fill, rigid isometry (rotation and reflection), object detection by color or connectivity, spatial alignment by anchor cells, and grid stamping.

Section 1.2: Lessons About the Problem Space

Lesson 1: ARC-AGI-1 tasks are mostly single-rule.

Nearly every task in ARC-AGI-1 has exactly one core transformation.

Once that transformation is identified, the task is solved.

Lesson 2: The hardest tasks were not conceptually hard - they were algorithmically precise.

Wave 75-79 tasks required multi-step alignment (e.g., assembling pieces at joints, completing concentric rings via 4-fold symmetry) but each task still had one master rule.

Lesson 3: Named rules generalize.

A rule named assemble_3pieces_at_5_joints captures a general pattern, not a single task's quirk.

Good naming means the rule is reusable if a similar task appears.

Lesson 4: Bug-free Prolog semantics matter enormously.

Three bugs in the final wave (invalid operator =\=:=, wrong arity for \+, and non-unified rotation across object groups) each produced wrong answers on tasks that were conceptually solved.

Lesson 5: Human Steps analysis accelerates rule discovery.

The ARC-AGI Human Steps document (/home/ccaitwo/PrologAI/docs/ARC-AGI_Human_Steps.txt) deconstructed every cognitive step a human takes when solving ARC-AGI puzzles.

That analysis directly informed rule design in later waves.

Lesson 6: The primitive library compounds over time.

Each wave added new primitives (BFS connected components, unified rotation, ring-completion via symmetry) that made subsequent waves easier.

By wave 79, the library contained enough building blocks that many new rules were assembled from existing primitives.

Section 1.3: Lessons About What Did NOT Work

Several approaches were attempted and abandoned during the ARC-AGI-1 climb.

Approach that failed: trying to match tasks by visual similarity without analyzing the training pairs.

Correct approach: always induce from training pairs, never from appearance alone.

Approach that failed: searching for rules by brute-force combination of primitives without a hypothesis about the transformation type.

Correct approach: form a hypothesis about the transformation category (e.g., "object relocation", "template stamping") and then look for the specific parameters.

Approach that failed: applying a rule from one task directly to a similar-looking task without verifying against that task's training pairs.

Correct approach: every rule must be verified against all training pairs of its assigned task before being accepted.

Approach that failed: rotating objects independently when they are part of a single connected assembly.

Correct approach: compute the rotation reference (MaxDR, the maximum row coordinate) from the union of all objects being transformed together.


PART 2: HOW ARC-AGI-2 DIFFERS FROM ARC-AGI-1

Section 2.1: Scale

ARC-AGI-2 grids are larger, up to 30 by 30 cells.

ARC-AGI-1 tasks also allowed 30 by 30, but ARC-AGI-2 uses the full range more aggressively.

Larger grids mean more objects, more regions, and more spatial relationships to track simultaneously.

Section 2.2: Compositional Rules

This is the most important structural difference.

ARC-AGI-1 tasks almost always have one core rule.

ARC-AGI-2 tasks frequently require two or more rules applied in a specific sequence, where the output of rule N is the input to rule N+1.

The ARC-AGI-2 technical report (Chollet 2025) describes this as "sequential application of multiple compositional rules".

It is virtually impossible to predict the correct intermediate state at step N+1 without first executing step N.

This means: a solver cannot pattern-match the final output directly from the input without simulating the intermediate steps.

This is a fundamental barrier for statistical learners.

Statistical learners (neural networks, LLMs) learn to predict output from input without explicitly simulating steps.

Symbolic induction can simulate steps explicitly - and this is its structural advantage.

Section 2.3: Contextual Rule Application

In ARC-AGI-1, the transformation rule was almost always fixed across all training pairs: same operation, same parameters, applied uniformly.

In ARC-AGI-2, the same core operation is applied differently depending on contextual elements within the grid.

For example, a transformation might apply clockwise rotation when a particular context marker is red, and counterclockwise rotation when the marker is blue.

Identifying which contextual element modulates the rule, and how it modulates it, requires a higher level of meta-rule reasoning.

Section 2.4: In-Context Symbol Definition

ARC-AGI-2 introduces tasks where the training pairs define the meaning of symbols on the fly.

A "symbol" in this context is an object, color, or configuration that stands for something other than itself - its meaning is not universal but is established by the task's own examples.

For example, a pair of colored cells might mean "rotate 90 degrees clockwise" in one task and "reflect horizontally" in another.

The solver must read the training pairs to learn what each symbol means in this task, then apply that learned meaning to the test input.

This is analogous to learning a small grammar from examples, not just applying a pre-known grammar.

Section 2.5: Fewer Redundant Training Examples

ARC-AGI-1 tasks often had training pairs that were similar enough to make the rule obvious from the first or second pair.

ARC-AGI-2 tasks are designed to require more of the training pairs to disambiguate the rule.

Human solvers spend an average of 300 seconds per ARC-AGI-2 task, compared to roughly 30 seconds per ARC-AGI-1 task.

This means the symbolic induction engine must be willing to use all available training pairs and to iterate its hypothesis until all pairs are explained.

Section 2.6: Resistance to Pretraining

ARC-AGI-2 was explicitly designed to be harder to solve by pretraining on synthetic ARC-style data.

Any approach that memorizes patterns from a large dataset of ARC tasks will perform poorly on ARC-AGI-2.

Pure induction from the task's own training pairs is precisely the approach that ARC-AGI-2 rewards.

This is a structural advantage for PrologAI: we never pretrain, we always induce from the task.


PART 3: NEW REASONING CATEGORIES REQUIRED

Section 3.1: Sequential State Machines

The most important new reasoning category in ARC-AGI-2 is the sequential state machine.

A state machine is a system that moves through a sequence of states, where each state depends on the previous one.

In ARC-AGI-2, the grid transformation is often a state machine: apply rule A to get intermediate state I1, then apply rule B to I1 to get intermediate state I2, then apply rule C to I2 to get the final output.

PrologAI's current rule architecture applies one rule end-to-end.

The extension needed is: a pipeline predicate that threads a grid through a sequence of named rules.

Section 3.2: Symbol Table Learning

Symbol table learning means: given training pairs, build a table mapping symbol identifiers to operations, then look up operations in that table when processing the test input.

This is new for PrologAI.

In ARC-AGI-1, rules were hard-coded at induction time.

In ARC-AGI-2, the rule parameters (or even the rule identity) may vary by task and must be read from the training pairs.

Section 3.3: Context-Dependent Dispatch

Context-dependent dispatch means: select which sub-rule to apply based on a context element in the grid.

This is a higher-order rule: a meta-rule that reads the context and dispatches to the appropriate object-level rule.

Section 3.4: Larger Object Inventories

ARC-AGI-2 tasks may have more objects and more object types than ARC-AGI-1.

Tracking all objects, their spatial relationships, their colors, and their transformation histories simultaneously requires a richer object model.


PART 4: WHAT PROLOGAI AND MENTOVA BRING TO ARC-AGI-2

Section 4.1: The Glass-Box Advantage

Every rule in PrologAI is a named, inspectable Prolog predicate.

When a rule fails on a training pair, the failure is observable: a specific predicate unification fails at a specific step, and the human analyst can read the trace.

No neural network offers this.

On ARC-AGI-2, where rules are more complex and compositional, the ability to inspect intermediate states is not a luxury - it is a necessity.

Section 4.2: The Pure Induction Advantage

PrologAI has never used pretraining.

ARC-AGI-2 is designed to defeat pretraining.

Therefore, PrologAI's structural posture is perfectly aligned with what ARC-AGI-2 demands.

Section 4.3: The Accumulated Primitive Library

After 79 waves of ARC-AGI-1, the arc_benchmark.pl file contains a rich library of primitives:

• BFS connected-component flood fill

• All 8 rigid isometries (4 rotations times 2 reflections) with unified MaxDR normalization

• Concentric ring completion by 4-fold symmetry

• Template stamping with multi-rotation search

• Anchor-based spatial alignment

• Color frequency analysis

• Bounding box extraction

• Chain reflection across marker edges

• Piece-assembly at joint cells

Many of these primitives will recur in ARC-AGI-2 rules.

They do not need to be re-invented.

They need to be composed in new ways.

Section 4.4: The Human Steps Framework

The ARC-AGI Human Steps document provides a cognitive decomposition of how humans solve these puzzles.

This framework generalizes to ARC-AGI-2.

The same cognitive steps apply: perceive objects, form a hypothesis about the transformation, verify against training pairs, and apply to the test input.

What changes is the hypothesis space: it now includes sequences of operations, context-dependent dispatch, and symbol table lookup.

The Human Steps framework needs to be extended with these new hypothesis categories.


PART 5: STRATEGIC ROADMAP FOR ARC-AGI-2

Section 5.1: Step 1 - Acquire the Task Data

The ARC-AGI-2 task data is available from the ARC Prize organization at arcprize.org.

The data format is identical to ARC-AGI-1: JSON files with training pairs and test pairs.

The first step is to download the ARC-AGI-2 public training set (400 tasks) and place the JSON files in /home/ccaitwo/Mentova/data/arc_agi_2/.

Section 5.2: Step 2 - Build arc_tasks_2.pl

ARC-AGI-1 tasks were loaded via arc_tasks.pl, which defines arc_agi_task(TaskId, Pairs, TestIn, TestOut).

The equivalent arc_tasks_2.pl should follow the same structure, with predicate names prefixed with arc2_ to avoid module-name collisions.

This allows the same verification infrastructure (arc_induce_rule_400/2 and its successor) to run on ARC-AGI-2 tasks.

Section 5.3: Step 3 - Extend arc_benchmark.pl with a Pipeline Predicate

The current architecture applies one rule at a time.

The needed extension is a pipeline predicate:

arc2_pipeline(TaskId, [Rule1, Rule2, ..., RuleN], Input, Output) :-
    foldl(arc2_apply_rule, [Rule1,...,RuleN], Input, Output).

This allows a task to be solved by a named sequence of named rules, each of which is already in the primitive library or will be added.

Section 5.4: Step 4 - Extend the Human Steps Analysis

The ARC-AGI Human Steps document should be updated with three new hypothesis categories:

1. Sequence hypothesis: the transformation is a pipeline of N named rules.

2. Context hypothesis: the transformation applies different sub-rules depending on a context element in the grid.

3. Symbol hypothesis: the transformation applies a symbol table learned from training pairs.

These three new hypothesis categories define where a human analyst should look first when a task is not solved by any single rule.

Section 5.5: Step 5 - Implement the Symbol Table Learner

The symbol table learner is a new Prolog predicate:

arc2_learn_symbol_table(Pairs, SymbolTable)

This predicate takes the training pairs and produces a table of the form:

SymbolTable = [symbol(Id1, Op1), symbol(Id2, Op2), ...]

Where Id is an object identifier (e.g., a colored cell) and Op is the operation it encodes (e.g., rotate_90, reflect_h).

This is the most algorithmically novel component needed for ARC-AGI-2.

Section 5.6: Step 6 - Begin Wave 1 of ARC-AGI-2

Following the same wave structure as ARC-AGI-1, begin with the tasks that appear most tractable using the existing primitive library.

Criteria for "most tractable" in early ARC-AGI-2 waves:

• Tasks that appear to require only one compositional step (i.e., a single rule, as in ARC-AGI-1)

• Tasks where the primitive operations (flood fill, stamping, rotation) are clearly visible in the transformation

• Tasks without in-context symbol definitions

This will establish an initial score and reveal which new primitive operations are most needed.

Section 5.7: Step 7 - Iterative Wave Structure

Maintain the same iterative wave structure that succeeded in ARC-AGI-1.

Each wave adds a small number of rules (3 to 8 is a good target per wave).

Each wave is verified, documented in the SPARC volumes, and merged before the next wave begins.

The wave log for ARC-AGI-2 should be started in a new file:

/home/ccaitwo/Mentova/papers/Climbing_ARC-AGI-2.txt

This file should follow the same structure as Climbing_ARC-AGI-1.txt.


PART 6: ANTICIPATED CHALLENGES AND MITIGATIONS

Section 6.1: Compositional Explosion

Challenge: the number of possible two-rule compositions grows quadratically with the number of primitives.

With 400 primitives, there are 160,000 possible two-step compositions.

Mitigation: hypothesis-first search.

Before searching for rule compositions, form a hypothesis about the transformation category.

The Human Steps analysis showed that human analysts immediately narrow the search space by observing structural properties (e.g., "objects are moving", "colors are being swapped").

This categorical hypothesis reduces the search space from 160,000 compositions to a dozen candidates.

Section 6.2: Ambiguous Training Pairs

Challenge: in ARC-AGI-2, fewer training pairs are provided per task.

This means more candidate rules will be consistent with the training pairs, making selection harder.

Mitigation: minimal description length (MDL) principle.

Among candidate rules consistent with training pairs, prefer the rule with the fewest primitive operations.

This is the symbolic equivalent of Occam's razor.

Simpler rules generalize better.

Section 6.3: Unknown Symbol Meanings

Challenge: when a task defines new symbols in-context, the solver must identify which objects are symbols, what they symbolize, and how to apply that symbolism to the test input.

Mitigation: contrastive analysis across training pairs.

If object X appears in every training input but its grid location changes in each output in a way that tracks another feature, then X is likely a contextual modifier.

The symbol table learner should implement contrastive analysis as its primary search strategy.

Section 6.4: Larger Grid Processing Overhead

Challenge: Prolog operations over 30 by 30 grids (900 cells) are 9 times more expensive than over 10 by 10 grids (100 cells).

Wave completion times will increase.

Mitigation: precompute object inventories.

Rather than re-scanning the full grid for each sub-operation, build an object inventory at the start of each rule application and pass it as a parameter through the pipeline.

This converts O(N squared) repeated scans to O(N squared) single scan plus O(K) object-level operations, where K is the number of objects.

Section 6.5: Higher Human Analyst Time

Challenge: ARC-AGI-2 tasks take humans 300 seconds on average, compared to 30 seconds for ARC-AGI-1 tasks.

This means the human analyst's time per wave is roughly 10 times longer.

Mitigation: prioritize tasks by structure visibility.

Some ARC-AGI-2 tasks will be visually clear - the transformation is obvious from inspection.

Start each wave with the most visually clear tasks.

Leave ambiguous tasks for later waves when more primitives are available.

Section 6.6: Sequential Dependencies Between Rules

Challenge: when a task requires rule A followed by rule B, the analyst must discover both rules and their correct order.

Applying them in the wrong order produces a wrong answer.

Mitigation: record intermediate states.

For any task that is not solved by a single rule, apply each candidate rule and record the intermediate output.

Then check: does any other candidate rule, applied to the intermediate output, produce the expected final output?

This two-step pipeline search is algorithmic and can be automated.


PART 7: WHAT ARC-AGI-1 TELLS US ABOUT ARC-AGI-2

Section 7.1: The Same Core Priors Apply

ARC-AGI-2 was designed by the same team and with the same foundational philosophy as ARC-AGI-1.

The core priors identified by Chollet (2019) still apply:

• Objectness: the world consists of discrete objects

• Goal directedness: there is a meaningful transformation connecting input to output

• Numbers and counting: quantity relationships matter

• Basic geometry and topology: spatial relationships, connectivity, symmetry

These priors are embedded in PrologAI's primitive library.

They do not need to be re-learned.

Section 7.2: Named Rules Are Still the Right Abstraction Level

In ARC-AGI-1, each task received a named rule at the right level of abstraction: not so specific that it applied to only one instance, not so general that it provided no guidance.

ARC-AGI-2 demands the same.

The difference is that a "named rule" in ARC-AGI-2 may be a named pipeline of two or three sub-rules, each sub-rule itself having a name.

Section 7.3: Glass-Box Is More Important, Not Less

As tasks become more complex and compositional, the ability to inspect intermediate states becomes more important.

The glass-box property of PrologAI (every rule is a named, inspectable Prolog predicate) is not just philosophically appealing - it is the practical tool that allows a human analyst to diagnose where a compositional pipeline is failing.

Section 7.4: The Climb Will Be Longer

ARC-AGI-1 required 79 waves over many months.

ARC-AGI-2 will require more waves.

Each task is harder.

Each rule requires more primitives.

Composition search is more expensive.

A realistic estimate for the ARC-AGI-2 climb is 100 to 200 waves before approaching 400/400.

But the same methodology that succeeded in ARC-AGI-1 will succeed in ARC-AGI-2.

Patience, systematic analysis, and named glass-box rules are the path.


PART 8: CONNECTION TO THE MENTOVA ARCHITECTURE

Section 8.1: ARC-AGI-2 as a Mentova Accomplishment Track

ARC-AGI-1 progress was tracked as accomplishments Acc_71 and Acc_72 in the Mentova Demonstration Plan (Volume 6).

ARC-AGI-2 should be defined as a new accomplishment track, beginning with Acc_73 or the next available number in the sequence.

This keeps the accomplishment numbering consistent and connects ARC-AGI-2 progress to the broader Mentova growth path.

Section 8.2: The Game Interface

Mentova's game interface (mentova_query(game, game_reason(arc_agi_2, deductive), R)) can be extended to target ARC-AGI-2 tasks as the new arc_tasks_2.pl module is built.

The same perceive-reason-act cycle that drove ARC-AGI-1 applies to ARC-AGI-2.

Section 8.3: Piagetan Level Implications

Mentova's cognitive development is tracked using an 8-level Piagetian framework (from Acc_67 documentation).

ARC-AGI-2's compositional, context-dependent reasoning corresponds to formal operational thought (Level 7 in the Piagetian scheme): the ability to reason about abstract relationships between abstract relationships.

Successfully climbing ARC-AGI-2 would deepen the evidence for Mentova's Piagetian Level 7 and 8 capabilities.


PART 9: IMMEDIATE NEXT STEPS CHECKLIST

1. Download ARC-AGI-2 public training set from arcprize.org and place JSON files in /home/ccaitwo/Mentova/data/arc_agi_2/.

2. Build arc_tasks_2.pl from the JSON files, following the same structure as arc_tasks.pl, with arc2_ prefixed predicates.

3. Visual survey: open 20 to 30 ARC-AGI-2 tasks and categorize them by transformation type (single-rule, compositional, symbol-table, context-dependent).

4. Build arc2_pipeline/4 in arc_benchmark.pl for sequential rule application.

5. Build arc2_learn_symbol_table/2 as a new predicate.

6. Start Climbing_ARC-AGI-2.txt as the wave log.

7. Begin Wave 1: target the 3 to 5 tasks that most clearly map to existing primitives.

8. Verify Wave 1 rules with arc_induce_rule_400/2 (or its arc2_ successor).

9. Merge Wave 1 via feature branch and PR, updating all SPARC volumes and tutorials.

10. Continue iteratively.


CONCLUSION

ARC-AGI-1 is concluded.

PrologAI and Mentova stand as the first system to achieve 400/400 = 100% on the ARC-AGI-1 public training set using pure symbolic induction and named glass-box rules.

That achievement was not luck.

It was the result of a disciplined methodology: hypothesize the transformation, induce the rule from training pairs, name it at the right abstraction level, verify it against all training pairs, and merge it into a growing named-rule library.

ARC-AGI-2 is harder.

But the methodology does not change.

What changes is the hypothesis space: it now includes compositional pipelines, in-context symbol tables, and context-dependent dispatch.

Each of these extensions is implementable in Prolog.

Each is inspectable in the glass-box manner that defines PrologAI.

Each builds on primitives that the ARC-AGI-1 climb already established.

The second mountain is taller.

The path up it is the same path, extended.

We know how to walk it.


REFERENCES

Chollet, F. (2019). On the Measure of Intelligence. arXiv:1911.01547.

ARC Prize Team (2025). ARC-AGI-2: A New Challenge for Frontier AI Reasoning Systems. arXiv:2505.11831.

ARC Prize Team (2025). ARC Prize 2025: Technical Report. arXiv:2601.10904.

Dison, D. R. (2026). ARC-AGI-1 Perfect Score Report. /home/ccaitwo/Mentova/papers/ARC-AGI-1_Perfect_Score_Report.txt.

Dison, D. R. (2026). Climbing ARC-AGI-1: 79 Waves of Pure Symbolic Induction. /home/ccaitwo/Mentova/papers/Climbing_ARC-AGI-1.txt. CONCLUDED. Final score: 400/400 = 100.00%.

Dison, D. R. (2026). ARC-AGI Human Steps. /home/ccaitwo/PrologAI/docs/ARC-AGI_Human_Steps.txt.

arc_benchmark.pl (2026). PrologAI named-rule library for ARC-AGI-1. /home/ccaitwo/Mentova/src/mentova/games/arc_benchmark.pl. 400 rules. 32190 lines.

END OF PAPER
