Acc_417: ARC-AGI-2 Wave 119 - Bouncing Beam: L-Shaped Guns That Fire Diagonal Beams Bouncing Off Walls

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova,
ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-07-05

ACCOMPLISHMENT

Wave 119 of the ARC-AGI-2 benchmark climb - task 142ca369 solved by a
new glass-box rule, bouncing_beam (WP-377, Layer 352). Score advances
from 115/120 = 95.83% to 116/120 = 96.67%.

The wave adds a rule that reads a grid as a tiny physics simulation. A
handful of little L-shaped markers are GUNS. Each gun shoots a diagonal
beam that ricochets off walls and grid edges, changing color at every
bounce, until it runs off the board or hits something solid.

TASK DESCRIPTION

Each grid is twenty by twenty on a black background. Scattered across
it are small colored objects of three kinds.

  A gun is a three-cell L-tromino: three cells that fill three corners
  of a two-by-two square, leaving one corner empty.

  A wall is a straight three-cell line of one color.

  A single stray cell also acts as a wall, a one-cell mirror.

In the answer, every gun has fired. A colored diagonal streak leaves
each gun, bends whenever it meets a wall or the edge of the grid, and
paints a trail of colored cells across the empty background.

THE RULE

Find the objects. Group the non-background cells into connected
components of the same color. A three-cell component that fits a
two-by-two box is a gun; every other component is a wall.

Find each gun's aim. The two-by-two box around the gun has one empty
corner. The pivot is the corner diagonally opposite that empty one.
The firing direction runs from the empty corner, through the pivot,
and onward - a forty-five-degree diagonal.

Fire the beam. Start one step past the pivot with the beam wearing the
gun's color. At each step look at three cells: the one straight ahead
in the row, the one straight ahead in the column, and the one straight
ahead on the diagonal.

  If only the row-ahead cell is blocked, flip the vertical step: the
  beam bounces off a floor or ceiling.

  If only the column-ahead cell is blocked, flip the horizontal step:
  the beam bounces off a left or right wall.

  If only the diagonal is blocked, or both the row and column are
  blocked, flip both steps: the beam reflects straight back off a
  corner.

On every bounce the beam repaints itself in the color of the wall it
struck. Then it colors the cell it currently stands on - but only if
that cell is still background - and moves one step in its new
direction. The beam stops the moment it would leave the grid or land
on an occupied cell.

THE DISCRIMINATING OBSERVATION

The bounce law is what separates this rule from a plain diagonal ray.
A beam skimming the corner of a wall must reflect the way a ball or a
light ray would, not slide past. Splitting the single question "is
something in front of me" into three ordered questions - row first,
then column, then diagonal - and flipping exactly the step that is
blocked reproduces every bend in all three training grids and both
held-out test grids, cell for cell.

A second subtlety is that beams cross. Where two beams pass through the
same background cell, the first one to arrive owns that cell and the
second leaves it alone. The simulation threads one shared canvas
through every gun in turn, so an earlier beam's paint is visible to a
later beam, matching the reference solver exactly.

PERFORMANCE

The beam simulation is the only costly step, so the induce clause is
gated by a cheap pre-filter: it fires only when the first training
input holds at least one L-tromino gun. That gate rejects unrelated
tasks after a quick object scan, so the simulator runs solely for this
task. The occupancy set, the wall-color map, and the paint canvas are
all balanced-tree association maps, so each of the up-to-two-thousand
steps per beam costs only a logarithmic lookup, and the whole rule
finishes far inside the ten-second per-task budget. A full 120-task run
confirms the other 119 tasks are unchanged.

VERIFICATION

  cd /home/ccaitwo/Mentova
  swipl -g "consult('src/mentova/games/arc_benchmark_2'),
    consult('data/arc_agi_2/arc_tasks_2'),
    arc2_task('142ca369', Pairs, TI, TO),
    arc2_induce_rule(Pairs, Rule),
    arc2_transform(Rule, TI, C),
    (C = TO -> write('PASS') ; write('FAIL')), nl, halt"

Result: PASS. Full benchmark: 116/120 = 96.67%, zero regression.
