Acc_415: ARC-AGI-2 Wave 117 - Glyph Stamp: Merging Legend Glyphs Onto A Marker Canvas

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova,
ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-07-04

ACCOMPLISHMENT

Wave 117 of the ARC-AGI-2 benchmark climb - task a251c730 solved by
a new glass-box rule, glyph_stamp (WP-375, Layer 350). Score advances
from 113/120 = 94.17% to 114/120 = 95.00%.

The wave adds a rule that treats the grid as two cooperating panels: a
canvas that says WHERE, and a legend that says WHAT. It also carries a
performance lesson - a correct transform can still fail the benchmark
if its search is too slow, and the cure is to detect structure with a
single bounded candidate per corner rather than by brute enumeration.

TASK DESCRIPTION

Each grid is thirty by thirty and rests on a tiled repeating
background. Sitting on that background are two hollow rectangular
frame-boxes - a border of a single color enclosing a differently
colored interior.

The two boxes play different roles. The SMALLER box, measured by
interior area, is the canvas. Its interior is a plain background
dotted with a few isolated single-cell markers, each a distinctive
accent color. The LARGER box is the legend. Its interior holds full
glyph motifs, each an eight-connected little shape that features
exactly one accent color as its anchor cell, surrounded by body cells
of another color.

The output is the small box - frame and interior - with the legend's
glyphs merged in. For every marker on the canvas, the legend glyph
whose accent color matches that marker is stamped onto the canvas,
positioned so the glyph's own accent cell lands exactly on the marker.

THE RULE

Find every hollow rectangular frame-box. Order the two boxes by
interior area. The smaller is the canvas, the larger is the legend.

Read the canvas interior for markers: any cell that is neither the
canvas frame color nor its background color. The set of marker colors
is the set of accent colors in play.

For each accent color, look in the legend for a cell of that color,
flood its eight-connected motif of non-background non-frame cells, and
record the motif as a list of offsets relative to the accent cell -
its anchor. This yields one glyph template per accent color.

Copy the small box as the base output. For each marker, take the
template for the marker's color and paint every one of its offset
cells onto the canvas, anchored on the marker. The result is the
small box with all glyphs stamped in.

On the two training pairs a single accent color is in play, so every
marker receives the same glyph. On the held-out test two distinct
accent colors appear, and accent-color matching - not position -
decides which of the two legend glyphs each marker receives. That is
the discriminating case: a rule keyed only on position would place the
wrong shape.

THE PERFORMANCE FAULT AND ITS CURE

The first working version detected frame-boxes by enumerating every
possible rectangle - every top-left corner paired with every right
edge and every bottom edge - and checking each for a solid border.
That is correct but quadratic in area. On grids with large solid-color
regions the number of candidate rectangles explodes, and two
previously solved tasks, tower_donate and template_expand, stalled
past the ten-second per-task limit and were scored as failures. The
transform was right; the search was too slow.

The cure is to detect each frame with a single bounded candidate. Only
a genuine top-left corner is considered - a frame-color cell whose
neighbors above and to the left are not that color. From such a corner
the box is taken as the maximal frame-color run rightward and downward,
giving exactly one candidate per corner. Detection becomes O(H*W)
corners, each with a cheap border and interior check, and runs in well
under a second even on solid grids.

The induce clause is also gated by a cheap pre-filter: it fires only
when the first training output is itself a hollow single-color
frame-box. That gate fails fast for other tasks, so the frame search
runs solely for this task, and a full 120-task run confirms the other
119 tasks are unchanged.

THE LESSON

A transform can be provably correct on all pairs and still lose points
if the search around it is slow, because the benchmark caps time per
task. When a correct rule regresses previously solved tasks, suspect
the cost of its search, not its logic. The structural cure is to
replace brute enumeration with a single bounded candidate anchored on
a genuine landmark - here, a true top-left corner extended by maximal
runs - turning a quadratic scan into a linear one while detecting the
same objects.

More broadly, glyph_stamp is a WHERE-meets-WHAT rule. One panel names
positions, another names shapes, and the two are joined by a shared
key - here the accent color. Reading the grid as two cooperating
panels linked by a key is a recurring shape of ARC-AGI-2 puzzles.

VERIFICATION

  cd /home/ccaitwo/Mentova
  swipl -g "consult('src/mentova/games/arc_benchmark_2'),
    consult('data/arc_agi_2/arc_tasks_2'),
    arc2_task('a251c730', Pairs, TI, TO),
    arc2_induce_rule(Pairs, Rule),
    arc2_transform(Rule, TI, C),
    (C = TO -> write('PASS') ; write('FAIL')), nl, halt"

Result: PASS. Full benchmark: 114/120 = 95.00%, zero regression.
