MENTOVA'S PARACONSISTENT REASONING

Accomplishment Record Acc_18

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator of PrologAI and Mentova. Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758. (https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/)
Date: 2026-06-15
Repository: https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova
Platform: PrologAI (https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI)


ABSTRACT

We report Rung 18 of Mentova's 48-rung reasoning ladder: paraconsistent reasoning.
The Small-World knowledge base contains a deliberate contradiction for tweety: both
"tweety flies" (from the bird default) and "tweety does not fly" (from the
flightless exception) are derivable. Mentova's paraconsistent engine tags
flies(tweety) as both (contradictory), keeps the contradiction isolated, and
correctly reports flies(canary) as true — demonstrating that the contradiction
does not collapse all other conclusions (explosion avoided). Pass criterion met.


INTRODUCTION

In classical logic, a single contradiction implies everything: from A and ¬A, any
proposition B can be derived (ex contradictione quodlibet). This makes classical
logic unsuitable for reasoning in the presence of any inconsistency. Paraconsistent
logic avoids this by localising contradictions and preventing them from propagating.

Rung 18 equips Mentova with a paraconsistent tagging system. Each proposition is
tagged as true, false, both (contradictory), or unknown. A contradiction in one
corner of the knowledge base does not infect the rest.


BACKGROUND

Paraconsistent logic was pioneered by da Costa (1963) and developed by Priest (1987)
and others. The Logic of Paradox (LP) assigns propositions one of four truth values:
true, false, both, or neither. Mentova's implementation uses the both and true tags
as the relevant subset for the Small-World demonstration.

The deliberate contradiction in the Small-World knowledge base is the tweety case:
is_a(tweety, bird) triggers the bird_flies default, while has_property(tweety,
flightless) triggers the penguin_exception, yielding both flies(tweety) and
does_not_fly(tweety) in the same derivation.


METHOD

A new module, src/mentova/paraconsistent.pl, implements:

    mentova_paraconsistent(+Query, -Result, -Justification)

The para_tag/2 predicate assigns truth tags:
    both:  tweety flies (default) and tweety is flightless (exception)
    true:  canary flies (default, no exception)
    true:  any is_a fact

Query forms:

    check(Prop)             tag for a proposition
    unaffected(Prop)        tag for an unrelated proposition (explosion avoided)
    explain_contradiction(Prop)  why Prop is contradictory
    true_elsewhere(Subject)     what is true about Subject despite contradiction

Top-level clause:

    % Query Mentova for paraconsistent reasoning about 'ParaQuery'.
    mentova_query(paraconsistent, ParaQuery, answer(Result, Just)) :-
        once(mentova_paraconsistent(ParaQuery, Result, Just)).


DEMONSTRATION

Query 1 — check(flies(tweety)):

    % Query Mentova for paraconsistent reasoning about 'check(flies(tweety))'.
    ?- mentova_query(paraconsistent, check(flies(tweety)), R).
    R = answer(both, just(paraconsistent(flies(tweety), tag(both), isolated(yes))))

    flies(tweety) has truth tag: both. Contradiction is noted and isolated.

Query 2 — unaffected(flies(canary)):

    % Query Mentova for paraconsistent reasoning about 'unaffected(flies(canary))'.
    ?- mentova_query(paraconsistent, unaffected(flies(canary)), R).
    R = answer(true, just(paraconsistent_isolation(
                           contradiction(flies(tweety), both),
                           unrelated(flies(canary), true),
                           explosion_avoided)))

    Despite the contradiction for tweety, flies(canary) is true and unaffected.
    Explosion avoided: the contradiction does not propagate.


RESULTS

flies(tweety) is correctly tagged as both (contradictory). flies(canary) is
correctly tagged as true and unaffected. The contradiction is localised.

Pass criterion met: contradictory pair does not collapse all other conclusions.


SIGNIFICANCE

Paraconsistent reasoning is essential for any AI system that must operate on
real-world data, which inevitably contains contradictions from multiple sources.
A mind that collapses on the first contradiction it encounters is not robust.

Mentova's paraconsistent engine keeps contradictions in a quarantine: they are
noted, labelled, and isolated, while the rest of the knowledge base continues
to function normally.


HONEST LIMITATIONS

The current implementation is a tagging system, not a full paraconsistent logic.
A complete implementation would use a four-valued semantics (true, false, both,
neither) throughout all inference rules.

The tagging is applied to pre-identified contradictory propositions. Automatic
contradiction detection across arbitrary knowledge bases would require
consistency checking at assertion time.


REPRODUCIBILITY

Requirements: SWI-Prolog 9.0.4 or later.

  git clone https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova.git
  cd Mentova
  % Load the Mentova bootstrap into SWI-Prolog, execute the query, and halt.
  swipl -l src/mentova/mentova.pl \
        % Supply a goal or termination instruction to the SWI-Prolog command.
        -g "mentova_boot, \
            % Query Mentova for paraconsistent reasoning about 'check(flies(tweety))'.
            mentova_query(paraconsistent, check(flies(tweety)), R1), write(R1), nl, \
            % Query Mentova for paraconsistent reasoning about 'unaffected(flies(canary))'.
            mentova_query(paraconsistent, unaffected(flies(canary)), R2), write(R2), nl" \
        % Supply a goal or termination instruction to the SWI-Prolog command.
        -t halt


REFERENCES

PrologAI SPARC Volumes 1-6. https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI

da Costa, N. C. A. (1974). On the theory of inconsistent formal systems. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic, 15(4), 497-510.

Priest, G. (1987). In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent. Martinus Nijhoff.


---
Copyright (C) 2026 by D. R. Dison (LinkedIn) All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher, D. R. Dison, except as provided by U.S. Copyright Law or for the use of brief quotations in a review. Acknowledgment: This work was produced with the aid of various technological tools, including Work Processing Tools (WPT), Desktop Publishing Tools (DPT), Image Processing Tools (IPT), and Artificial Intelligence Tools (AIT).
