Acc_134: Cell Neighborhood Analysis - The Neighbor Pack

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator of PrologAI and Mentova,
ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-06-25


Abstract

PrologAI gains the neighbor pack (nb_* predicate family, Layer 93, Work
Package 114), a 14-predicate module for cell-level local neighborhood
analysis. The pack provides raw 4-connected and 8-connected neighbor
access, boundary and interior classification relative to a background
color, neighbor value counting, color contact detection, grid-modifying
flood fill, and single-step dilation.

42 PLUnit acceptance tests pass.


1. Motivation

Many visual reasoning tasks require analyzing what is immediately adjacent
to a cell: what colors surround it, whether it is on the edge or interior
of a shape, whether two shapes are touching. Existing packs work at higher
levels of abstraction:

The connect pack (Layer 64) computes connected components across many hops.
Its flood fill returns a list of cells in the region, not a modified grid.
Its border and interior predicates take an existing region as input, not a
background color applied globally.

The trace pack (Layer 82) provides outline operations on a specific region
passed as a list and edge cells relative to the grid boundary.

The scene pack (Layer 37) and obj pack (Layer 69) reason about whole
obj(Color, Cells) objects, not about individual cells and their neighbors.

None of these answer the question: "what is immediately next to THIS CELL,
and what does that imply about its role in the grid?"

The neighbor pack fills this gap with direct, cell-level predicates.


2. Predicate Inventory

The 14 predicates fall into five groups.


2.1 Raw Neighbor Access

nb_4neighbors(Grid, R, C, Neighbors) returns a list of nb(Row,Col,Val)
terms for each valid 4-connected neighbor. Directions are checked in order:
up, down, left, right. Out-of-bounds directions are omitted. Corner cells
have 2 neighbors, edge cells have 3, interior cells have 4.

nb_8neighbors(Grid, R, C, Neighbors) returns up to 8 neighbors covering
all diagonals as well.


2.2 Boundary and Interior Classification

nb_is_boundary(Grid, R, C, Bg) succeeds if cell (R,C) is non-Bg and has
at least one 4-neighbor that is either out of bounds or has value Bg. Cut
after the first qualifying neighbor makes the predicate deterministic.

nb_is_interior(Grid, R, C, Bg) succeeds if cell (R,C) is non-Bg and none
of its 4-neighbors is out of bounds or has value Bg.

nb_boundary_cells(Grid, Bg, Cells) collects all boundary cells as sorted
R-C pairs. nb_interior_cells collects all interior cells.


2.3 Neighbor Value Analysis

nb_count_same(Grid, R, C, N) counts 4-neighbors with the same color value
as (R,C). nb_count_diff counts 4-neighbors with a different color value.

nb_adjacent_colors(Grid, R, C, Colors) returns the sorted set of distinct
values found among the 4-neighbors.


2.4 Contour and Color Contact

nb_contour(Grid, Color, Cells) finds all cells of Color that are adjacent to
something different (a different color or the grid boundary). This is the
visible outline of the Color region.

nb_color_touches(Grid, ColorA, ColorB) succeeds if any ColorA cell is
4-adjacent to any ColorB cell anywhere in Grid. Uses cut for determinism.

nb_touching_pairs(Grid, ColorA, ColorB, Pairs) enumerates all such
4-adjacency pairs as (R1-C1)-(R2-C2) terms.


2.5 Grid-Modifying Operations

nb_flood_fill(Grid, R, C, FillVal, Result) replaces the 4-connected region
containing (R,C) with FillVal, returning the modified grid. Unlike the connect
pack's cc_flood4 (which returns a list of cells), this returns a modified
grid. The filled value itself acts as a visited marker, so no separate
visited set is required.

nb_dilate(Grid, Bg, Color, Result) expands the Color region by one cell in
all 4-connected directions, replacing adjacent Bg cells with Color.
Non-Bg, non-Color cells are unchanged.


3. Implementation Notes

The pack imports only nth0/3 and nth0/4 from library(lists), and member/2
from library(lists). No other libraries or PrologAI packs are imported.
The built-ins findall/3, sort/2, length/2, and between/3 are used but
not imported.

The ERC (English Readable Code) convention is followed throughout.

The internal helper nb_set_cell_ uses the four-argument form of nth0/4 in
SWI-Prolog to replace a specific cell without rebuilding the full grid
manually. The helper nb_set_cells_ applies nb_set_cell_ to a list of R-C
pairs for bulk replacement.

The flood fill algorithm uses a worklist (list-based queue). Because
already-filled cells have been changed from SeedVal to FillVal, they
are automatically skipped when dequeued without needing an explicit
visited set.


4. Integration with the Pack Stack

The neighbor pack is Layer 93, above the region pack (Layer 92).

Classify every non-Bg cell as boundary or interior:

nb_boundary_cells(Grid, 0, Boundary),
nb_interior_cells(Grid, 0, Interior).

Find shapes that are touching and report the contact:

nb_touching_pairs(Grid, 1, 2, Pairs).

Fill an enclosed region (background flood fill from an interior point):

nb_flood_fill(Grid, R, C, 7, Filled).

Detect whether a color forms a closed ring (all cells are boundary, none
interior):

nb_interior_cells(Grid, 0, []) meaning no cell of the non-Bg region is
surrounded on all four sides by non-Bg cells.

Dilate a seed cell iteratively to grow a region:

nb_dilate(Grid0, 0, 1, Grid1), nb_dilate(Grid1, 0, 1, Grid2).


5. SPARC Documentation

Work Package 114 is documented in:

Specification Part 104 (NB-NB-001 through NB-NB-014).

Pseudocode Part 104.

Architecture Part ARCH-80 positioning the neighbor pack at Layer 93 and
distinguishing it from the connect, trace, scene, and obj packs.

Refinement acceptance criteria AC-NB-001 through AC-NB-042.

Completion Work Package 114.


6. Conclusion

The neighbor pack gives PrologAI precise cell-level local reasoning. Raw
neighbor access, boundary and interior classification, neighbor value
counting, color contact queries, grid-modifying flood fill, and dilation
are now available as clean symbolic predicates.

PrologAI now carries 112 work packages and 134 Mentova accomplishments.
