Acc_425: The Fact Refinery and the Minority Report Panel - Growing Knowledge Without Trusting a Fluent Guess

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova, ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-07-10


ABSTRACT

This paper describes the delivery of Acc_425, implementing the Version 2
additions of the Teach Mentova To Chat master plan: Appendix Q (scaling and
storage), Appendix R (direct and testimonial grounding), Appendix S (the fact
refinery and the Minority Report panel), and Appendix T (the elevator speech).
Mentova gains two new modules. The reference library is the look-it-up tier:
large reference text that Mentova can search and read one page at a time but
has not understood, and which is never asserted as fact. The fact refinery is
the frontier between that library and Mentova's understood knowledge: a
six-stage pipeline in which language models propose candidate facts in a
strict sourced shape, an odd panel of genuinely different models votes blind
with normalized answers, a plain program - on which no model gets a vote -
confirms that each fact connects to grounded concepts and that its citation
is real, survivors grade into confidence lanes, splits go to a Minority
Report Bin for a person, and reviewed facts are grounded with their full
provenance so that "why?" is answered by citing the record, the votes, and
the checks. The demonstration passes all twelve of its acceptance criteria.


WHAT WAS BUILT

Two modules, one demonstration, and four policy artifacts.

src/mentova/reference_library.pl is the look-it-up library of Appendix Q.
Sources are registered text files; pages and searches stream line by line, so
a corpus never has to fit in memory; and the module's only dynamic state is
its registry, so library content can never leak into the fact store.
Citations have the shape source(SourceId, LineNo) and can be verified
reachable - the currency of testimonial grounding.

src/mentova/fact_refinery.pl is the refinery of Appendix S. Every model in it
is a caller-supplied goal - a free local model through the guarded Ollama
adapter, a stronger remote referee, or a deterministic test double - because
the refinery's cardinal rule is that nothing a language model says is trusted
merely because a language model said it.

demos/fact_refinery_demo.pl is the acceptance demonstration, and the
repository also gains a .gitignore that keeps large corpora out of git, the
storage policy document, the elevator speech document, and version 2 of all
six living chat documents.


HOW IT WORKS

Stage one, extraction. A cheap model reads a passage and proposes candidates
in a strict shape - subject, relation, object, the exact source sentence, and
the citation. The shape is law: malformed proposals are dropped by plain code.

Stage two, qualification. A stronger model checks each candidate and assigns
the grounding kind of Appendix R: direct, for what can be perceived, like a
ball being round; or testimonial, for what a trusted record attests, like the
Peace of Westphalia being signed in 1648 - the very example Appendix R uses.
A fact does not have to be touchable to be understood.

Stage three, the Minority Report panel. An odd number of genuinely different
models votes on each fact, blind, so they cannot echo one another. Answers
are normalized before counting, so the same fact in different words counts as
agreement and a genuinely different claim counts as a split. "I do not know"
is an honest abstention and is never counted as a disagreement.

Stage four, the honesty gate. Ordinary rule-following code - no model gets a
vote - confirms that the fact's words connect to concepts already grounded
and that the citation is real and reachable. The gate is kept even for
unanimous facts, because models trained on overlapping text can share a
misconception: the vote shows the models concur, the source check shows
reality concurs, and both are wanted. In the demonstration, the panel
unanimously endorses a fact about the moon, and the gate rejects it anyway,
because "moon" is not yet a grounded concept.

Stage five, lanes and review. Unanimous facts enter a high-confidence lane
that may be accepted automatically with a deterministic random sample audited
by hand; a strong majority, such as four of five, gets a lighter human look;
a split goes to the Minority Report Bin, which is not a trash can but a
valuable queue, because disagreement clusters exactly where knowledge is
contested. A stronger referee model is spent only where it changes an
outcome: on the Bin. Survivors enter the chat's existing Review Queue through
the same machinery mentors use, under a reserved system identity.

Stage six, grounding. An approved fact becomes an understood fact with all
its provenance intact, and Mentova's honest answer to "why?" is: a trusted
record says so, here is that record and its exact sentence, here is who
agreed and who did not, and here are the checks that passed.


WHY THIS MATTERS

Language models produce confident, well-formed sentences that sound like
facts, including when they are wrong - which is the opposite of what this
project stands for. The refinery lets Mentova put many such models to work,
around the clock, without ever inheriting their confidence. Volume grows;
honesty does not shrink. And the two-tier storage rule of Appendix Q keeps
the distinction physical: the library on the shelf is never confused with
the knowledge in the head.


TECHNICAL NOTES

The demonstration follows the Mentova convention of asserting its own
acceptance criteria and printing PASS or FAIL:

    swipl -l demos/fact_refinery_demo.pl -g run_fact_refinery_demo -t halt

Twelve of twelve criteria pass, on a fresh persistence file and again on a
re-attached one. The panel members in the demonstration are deterministic
doubles, so the pipeline is proven independent of any live model; the Ollama
adapter reports the locally installed models (qwen3:8b and qwen3:14b, the
model family Appendix S itself names) and is guarded by a catch and a time
limit so it can never hang or lie. The hand-audit sample is reproducible
from its seed. The Acc_423 chat code is unchanged, and the Acc_424
demonstration still passes nine of nine.


COMPLETION

Acc_425 is delivered. SPARC documentation has been updated: Specification
v356, Pseudocode v348, Architecture v349, Refinement v413, Completion v419.
The six living chat documents are at version 2, with version 1 archived.


COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 D. R. Dison.

All rights reserved.

The code, documentation, papers, and announcements associated with the Mentova and PrologAI projects are the intellectual property of D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University), Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova.

Free for non-commercial use with required attribution.

Commercial use requires a negotiated license.

Contact: ai.university.aiu@gmail.com
