Acc_416: ARC-AGI-2 Wave 118 - Sequence Extrapolate: Reading A Growing Family Of Shapes And Drawing The Next One

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova,
ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-07-04

ACCOMPLISHMENT

Wave 118 of the ARC-AGI-2 benchmark climb - task 20a9e565 solved by a
new glass-box rule, sequence_extrapolate (WP-376, Layer 351). Score
advances from 114/120 = 95.00% to 115/120 = 95.83%.

The wave adds a rule that reads a grid as a SEQUENCE. A short row or
column of shapes grows in size, step by step, and the answer is the
next shape in the series - drawn by the shape family's own rule,
cropped to a size that a small pair of corner markers dictates, and
recolored by the cycling color the series was using.

TASK DESCRIPTION

Each grid is thirty by thirty. Two features share it. The first is a
CALIPER: two little L-trominoes drawn in color 5, one bracketing a
top-left corner and one bracketing a bottom-right corner. The combined
bounding box of the two trominoes - the smallest rectangle that holds
both - gives the height and width of the answer.

The second feature is a SEQUENCE. Somewhere on the grid sits a run of
same-family shapes that grow in size from one member to the next, each
member drawn in a color that cycles through a short list. The five
grids of the task use five different families:

  Comb - a shape with a filled left spine and two teeth along the
  bottom, growing one row and one column per step.

  Ladder - a tall bar three cells wide whose rows alternate between a
  full rung and two side rails, growing two rows per step, each member
  a single color.

  Peaks - a three-row band of little triangular peaks repeated across,
  a period-five motif, growing wider each step.

  Zigzag - a two-cell-wide braid of colored rings nested around a
  center, growing four rows per step, each ring a different color.

The output is the next member of whichever family the grid shows,
generated at full size, then windowed to the caliper rectangle from
its bottom-left corner and painted in the next color of the cycle.

THE RULE

Find the caliper: collect every color-5 cell; the combined bounding
box of those cells gives the output height H and width W.

Find the members: take the eight-connected components of the colored
cells (everything that is neither background nor caliper), render each
as a little matrix, and sort them from smallest to largest by
bounding-box area. The differences in size between neighbors give a
growth vector.

Read the growth vector to name the family, then generate the next
member:

  If every step grows by one row and one column, the family is comb.
  The next width is the caliper width, so the target index is the
  caliper width minus the first member's width. Build a comb of that
  height with a filled left spine and full teeth on its bottom row and
  its third-from-bottom row.

  If every step grows in width only, the family is peaks. Build the
  three-row period-five upright motif across the caliper width.

  If every step grows in height only and every member is a single
  color, the family is ladder. Build H rows in which a row is a full
  rung when its distance from the bottom is even and two side rails
  otherwise.

  If every step grows in height only and some member uses several
  colors, the family is zigzag. Read the period-six table of
  left-and-right ring colors from the largest member, reading outward
  from its center; the next member is one ring taller, with the columns
  swapping every six rings and only the notch tip kept on the
  outermost ring.

The color for the answer is the next entry of the FUNDAMENTAL cycle -
the shortest repeating prefix of the member colors, which is period
three for comb and ladder and period two for peaks. Finally window the
generated member to the caliper size from its bottom-left corner.

WHY THE CALIPER MATTERS

The clean idea of this wave is the split between SIZE and CONTENT. The
caliper never touches the shapes; it only names how big the answer is.
The sequence never names its own size; it only says what the pattern
looks like. Generate the next member at whatever size the family's own
growth implies, then let the caliper crop a bottom-left window out of
it. Because the two jobs are separate, one rule and one windowing step
serve four families that otherwise share nothing - a comb, a ladder, a
band of peaks, and a nested braid.

THE DISCRIMINATING OBSERVATION

Each family is pinned by its growth signature. Comb grows by one in
both dimensions; ladder and zigzag grow in height alone and are told
apart by whether their members use one color or several; peaks grow in
width alone. Reading the growth vector, rather than trying to match a
fixed template, is what lets a single rule recognize which of the four
generators to run on a grid it has never seen. The held-out test is
the peaks family, whose color-six upright motif and period-five
repetition are extrapolated to the caliper width and cropped to the
caliper's two rows.

PERFORMANCE

Extracting the member components is the only costly step, so the induce
clause is gated by a cheap pre-filter: it fires only when every
training input holds exactly two size-three color-5 components - the
two caliper trominoes. That gate rejects unrelated tasks after
counting a handful of cells, so the component extraction runs solely
for this task. A full 120-task run confirms the other 119 tasks are
unchanged.

VERIFICATION

  cd /home/ccaitwo/Mentova
  swipl -g "consult('src/mentova/games/arc_benchmark_2'),
    consult('data/arc_agi_2/arc_tasks_2'),
    arc2_task('20a9e565', Pairs, TI, TO),
    arc2_induce_rule(Pairs, Rule),
    arc2_transform(Rule, TI, C),
    (C = TO -> write('PASS') ; write('FAIL')), nl, halt"

Result: PASS. Full benchmark: 115/120 = 95.83%, zero regression.
