Acc_414: ARC-AGI-2 Wave 116 - Concentric Rings Repair: Chebyshev Distance For True Nested Rectangles

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova,
ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-07-04

ACCOMPLISHMENT

Wave 116 of the ARC-AGI-2 benchmark climb - task 13e47133 solved
by a one-line repair of the existing glass-box rule concentric_rings
(WP-374, Layer 349). Score advances from 112/120 = 93.33% to
113/120 = 94.17%.

The concentric_rings solver already reproduced both training pairs
of task 13e47133 exactly, yet missed the held-out test by twenty-nine
cells - all of them a color off by exactly one ring. The wave shows
that the miss was a single wrong choice of distance metric, invisible
in training and exposed only by the test's more complex geometry.

TASK DESCRIPTION

Each grid is a background field walled by a divider color - the most
frequent non-background color - into regions. In the training pairs
the divider draws a simple rectangular frame; in the test it draws
several NESTED rectangular boxes, one inside another. Every walled
region is filled with concentric rectangular rings. A cell's ring
index is its distance from the region boundary, where the boundary
is the grid edge or any cell adjacent to a divider wall: the outer
ring is index zero and the index grows inward.

Single-cell markers dropped inside a region name the color cycle. A
marker sitting at ring K contributes its own color to cycle position
K; positions with no marker default to the background color; and the
cycle repeats outward. The output paints every region cell with
cycle[ring mod cycle-length], while the divider walls pass through
unchanged.

THE FAULT

The ring distance was computed by a multi-source breadth-first search
that started from every boundary cell at distance zero and expanded
one step at a time. The expansion used FOUR-connected steps (up,
down, left, right), which measures Manhattan distance.

For a plain rectangle this is correct. Manhattan distance from all
four edges is min(top, bottom, left, right), which is exactly the
concentric-rectangle ring index, so both training regions - simple
rectangles - were reproduced perfectly.

The test is different. Where two nested divider boxes meet, the
walled region has a CONCAVE corner. Four-connected propagation cannot
cut across a corner; it walks around it and arrives one step late,
over-counting the ring index by one along the corner diagonal. Those
over-counted cells then pick the wrong entry of the color cycle -
the twenty-nine one-off cells seen in the diff.

THE REPAIR

Switch the distance propagation from four-connected to eight-connected
steps, which measures Chebyshev distance. Chebyshev distance from the
boundary keeps the ring index constant along a box corner, so the
rings become true concentric rectangles even around concave corners.
This is a single change: the neighbour helper used by the ring-distance
breadth-first search moves from the four-neighbour set to the
eight-neighbour set. The boundary test and the flood-fill that
separates regions are left four-connected and untouched.

WHY IT IS SAFE

The fault was invisible in training precisely because both training
regions are simple rectangles, where Manhattan and Chebyshev
boundary-distance coincide. Only the test's nested boxes create the
concave corners that separate the two metrics. After the repair, all
twenty-nine miscolored test cells are corrected, both training pairs
still reproduce exactly, and a full run of the 120-task benchmark
shows the other 119 tasks unchanged. The net effect is a clean plus
one with zero regression.

THE LESSON

A rule that passes every training pair can still hide a wrong metric,
because the easy training geometry can make two different metrics
agree. Manhattan and Chebyshev boundary-distance are identical on a
plain rectangle and diverge only at a concave corner. When a solver
reproduces training exactly yet misses the test by a uniform one-ring
shift, suspect the distance metric before suspecting the color logic,
and reach for the geometry - concentric rectangles are a Chebyshev
object, not a Manhattan one.

VERIFICATION

  cd /home/ccaitwo/Mentova
  swipl -g "consult('src/mentova/games/arc_benchmark_2'),
    consult('data/arc_agi_2/arc_tasks_2'),
    arc2_task('13e47133', Pairs, TI, TO),
    arc2_induce_rule(Pairs, Rule),
    arc2_transform(Rule, TI, C),
    (C = TO -> write('PASS') ; write('FAIL')), nl, halt"

Result: PASS. Full benchmark: 113/120 = 94.17%, zero regression.
