MENTOVA INFERS THE BEST EXPLANATION

Accomplishment Record Acc_3

Author: D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University). Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova. Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758. (https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/)
Date: 2026-06-16
Repository: https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova
Platform: PrologAI (https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI)


ABSTRACT

We report Mentova's third accomplished reasoning rung: abductive reasoning,
or inference to the best explanation. Given an observed fact, Mentova retrieves
all causal hypotheses from the Small-World Commonsense knowledge base, scores
each by its prior probability, and returns the best-supported explanation
together with its full evidence record. Three observations are demonstrated:
wet_ground (two competing causes — rain and sprinkler — with sprinkler winning
at score 0.60 versus rain at 0.30), fatigue (exercise wins over illness, 0.70
versus 0.20), and smoke (fire is the sole cause, score 0.50). In every case the
best-supported cause is returned with its causal link, prior, likelihood, and
evidence note — all glass-box and human-readable.


INTRODUCTION

Abduction, or inference to the best explanation, answers the question: given
that I observe O, what is the most plausible cause? It is the form of reasoning
used when a doctor diagnoses from symptoms, a scientist proposes a hypothesis,
or an engineer traces a fault.

The pass criterion from Volume 6 (Rung 3): the best-supported cause returns
with its evidence.

Abduction is the third direction of logical reasoning alongside deduction (Rung
1, apply a known rule) and induction (Rung 2, discover a rule from examples).
With Rung 3 complete, Mentova can reason in all three classical directions.


BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

Abductive reasoning in logic was formalised by Peirce and later formalised
computationally in Abductive Logic Programming (Kakas, Kowalski & Toni, 1992).
In the symbolic setting, abduction searches for a set of hypotheses that, together
with background knowledge, entail the observation. Mentova's implementation uses
a probabilistic ranking step to select among competing hypotheses, combining the
causal structure of the knowledge base with prior probabilities.

The Small-World Commonsense knowledge base provides causes/2 facts (causal
relations) and prob_fact/2 entries (prior probabilities) that together define
the abductive search space for this rung.


METHOD

The abduction module (src/mentova/abduction.pl) implements mentova_abduce/4:

    mentova_abduce(+Observation, -Best, -Score, -AllExplanations)

Three steps:

    1. Candidate retrieval: findall(H, causes(H, Observation), Candidates)
       collects every hypothesis H that the knowledge base says causes the
       observation.

    2. Scoring: each candidate H receives a score = Prior x Likelihood.
       Prior is prob_fact(H, P) if available, else 0.5 (neutral default).
       Likelihood is derived from observation/3 counts if available, else 1.0.

    3. Ranking: msort/2 sorts by score ascending; last/2 returns the winner.
       All explanations are returned for transparency.

Each explanation is returned as:
    explanation(Hypothesis, Score,
                evidence(cause(H, Obs), prior(P), likelihood(L), note(N)))

The mentova_query/3 interface exposes this as:
    % Query Mentova for abductive reasoning about 'explain(Observation)'.
    mentova_query(abductive, explain(Observation), answer(Best, Justification))


THE DEMONSTRATION

Three observations, each returning the best explanation with its evidence:

QUERY 1 — wet_ground

Two competing causes in the knowledge base:
    causes(rain,      wet_ground)   prior(rain)      = 0.30
    causes(sprinkler, wet_ground)   prior(sprinkler)  = 0.60

Output:
    Observation : wet_ground
    All explanations (scored):
      rain       (score 0.3000)
      sprinkler  (score 0.6000)
    Best explanation:
      explanation(sprinkler, 0.6,
                  evidence(cause(sprinkler, wet_ground),
                           prior(0.6), likelihood(1.0),
                           note(no_direct_observation)))

QUERY 2 — fatigue

Two competing causes:
    causes(exercise, fatigue)   prior(exercise) = 0.70
    causes(illness,  fatigue)   prior(illness)  = 0.20

Output:
    Observation : fatigue
    All explanations (scored):
      illness   (score 0.2000)
      exercise  (score 0.7000)
    Best explanation:
      explanation(exercise, 0.7,
                  evidence(cause(exercise, fatigue),
                           prior(0.7), likelihood(1.0),
                           note(no_direct_observation)))

QUERY 3 — smoke

Single cause:
    causes(fire, smoke)   prior(fire) = 0.5 (default)

Output:
    Observation : smoke
    All explanations (scored):
      fire  (score 0.5000)
    Best explanation:
      explanation(fire, 0.5,
                  evidence(cause(fire, smoke),
                           prior(0.5), likelihood(1.0),
                           note(no_direct_observation)))


RESULTS

Pass criterion met: in all three cases the best-supported cause is returned with
its full evidence record — causal link, prior probability, likelihood, and note.

wet_ground: sprinkler wins over rain (0.60 > 0.30). The ground is more likely
wet because the sprinkler is running than because it rained, given the priors.
This is the counter-intuitive result that a good abductive reasoner must produce:
the more probable cause wins even when the less probable cause (rain) is the
first one that comes to mind.

fatigue: exercise wins over illness (0.70 > 0.20). Exercise is the more common
cause of fatigue in the Small-World domain.

smoke: fire is the only registered cause; it is returned with the neutral prior
of 0.50 and a note that no direct observation counts are available.


SIGNIFICANCE

Mentova has now demonstrated all three classical directions of logical reasoning:
deduction (Rung 1), induction (Rung 2), and abduction (Rung 3). Each direction
is glass-box: the answer is accompanied by the chain of facts, rules, or evidence
that produced it.

The abduction result for wet_ground illustrates a strength of probabilistic
abduction over pure logical abduction: when multiple hypotheses are logically
consistent with an observation, probability resolves the tie in a principled,
auditable way.

Every evidence record is a Prolog term a person can inspect, challenge, or
correct. If the prior for rain is updated, the ranking changes — no retraining,
no hidden weights, just a fact change.


HONEST LIMITATIONS

Priors are hand-authored in the knowledge base rather than learned from data.
The likelihood model is minimal: observation counts from a small table, not a
full conditional probability model.

The system does not yet combine multiple observations (e.g., "wet ground AND
thunder") to jointly score hypotheses — each observation is abduced independently.
Multi-observation joint abduction is a natural extension.

The scoring function (Prior x Likelihood) is a simple heuristic, not a full
Bayesian posterior. Proper Bayesian abduction would normalise over all hypotheses.


REPRODUCIBILITY

Requirements: SWI-Prolog 9.0.4 or later.

    git clone https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/Mentova.git
    cd Mentova
    % Load the Mentova bootstrap into SWI-Prolog, execute the query, and halt.
    swipl -l src/mentova/mentova.pl \
          % Execute a abductive query 'explain(wet_ground)' via Mentova and write the result.
          -g "mentova_query(abductive, explain(wet_ground), R), write(R), nl" \
          % Supply a goal or termination instruction to the SWI-Prolog command.
          -t halt


REFERENCES

PrologAI SPARC Volumes 1-6. https://github.com/ai-university-aiu/PrologAI

Kakas, A., Kowalski, R., & Toni, F. (1992). Abductive Logic Programming.
Journal of Logic and Computation, 2(6).

Peirce, C. S. (1883). A Theory of Probable Inference. Studies in Logic.

WordNet. Princeton University. https://wordnet.princeton.edu

ConceptNet. MIT Media Lab. https://conceptnet.io


---
Copyright (C) 2026 by D. R. Dison (LinkedIn) All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher, D. R. Dison, except as provided by U.S. Copyright Law or for the use of brief quotations in a review. Acknowledgment: This work was produced with the aid of various technological tools, including Work Processing Tools (WPT), Desktop Publishing Tools (DPT), Image Processing Tools (IPT), and Artificial Intelligence Tools (AIT).