Acc_418: ARC-AGI-2 Wave 120 - Cyan Stamp: Cyan Instruction Symbols That Stamp Their Shape Onto Colored Dots

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova,
ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-07-05

ACCOMPLISHMENT

Wave 120 of the ARC-AGI-2 benchmark climb - task abc82100 solved by a
new glass-box rule, cyan_stamp (WP-378, Layer 353). Score advances
from 116/120 = 96.67% to 117/120 = 97.50%.

The wave adds a rule that reads a grid as a tiny instruction language.
Little cyan glyphs are stamps, and each glyph carries a two-cell arrow
that names two colors: which colored dots to look for, and what color
to paint the glyph in when it is stamped on top of each dot.

TASK DESCRIPTION

Each grid is drawn on a black background. Sitting on it are one or more
small symbols made of cyan cells (color 8), and scattered elsewhere are
lone colored dots.

  A symbol is a cluster of cyan cells - the SHAPE that will be stamped.

  Beside one edge of each symbol is a two-cell domino pointing inward.
  The cell touching the symbol names one color; the cell one step
  farther out names another.

  Everywhere else on the grid are single colored dots.

In the answer, the cyan symbols and their little dominoes are gone. In
their place, every colored dot that matches the SOURCE color has been
overpainted with a copy of the symbol shape, drawn in the TARGET color.

THE RULE

Group the cyan cells. Join cyan cells that touch, including diagonally,
into 8-connected symbols. Each symbol is one stamp.

Read the domino. Take the symbol's bounding box and look just outside
each edge, scanning top, then bottom, then left, then right. The first
place where two cells in a row - one touching the box edge, the next one
step farther out - are both non-black and non-cyan is the instruction.
The near cell (touching the box) gives the TARGET paint color; the far
cell gives the SOURCE dot color.

Fix the origin and the shape. The ORIGIN is the box-edge cell the domino
points at, one inward step from the near cell. The SHAPE is the list of
(row, column) offsets from that origin to every cyan cell of the symbol.

Stamp and erase. Start from a blank grid. For every lone dot whose color
matches a SOURCE color, paint the matching symbol shape at that dot in
the TARGET color, offset by offset. Erase all cyan symbols and both
domino cells. Every other colored cell - one that is neither a source
dot nor part of a symbol - copies straight through to the same place.

THE DISCRIMINATING OBSERVATION

The reading of the domino is what turns a pile of colored cells into a
language. The two cells are not decoration: their order encodes a
mapping. The inner cell is the ink the stamp will be printed in; the
outer cell is the address, the color of the dots to print on. Reading
them the other way around, or ignoring the scan order of the four edges,
breaks at least one of the four training pairs. Only the near-is-target,
far-is-source reading, with the origin taken as the inward step the
domino points at, reproduces all four training pairs and the held-out
test grid cell for cell.

A second subtlety is that stamps overlap. Two shapes printed on nearby
dots can cover the same cell, and a printed shape can even land where a
symbol used to be. Rendering the whole board in row-major order - each
source dot painting its offsets, each pass-through cell writing its own
color - composes these overlaps exactly as the reference solver does.

PERFORMANCE

The symbol reading is the only real work, so the induce clause is gated
by a cheap pre-filter: it fires only when the first training input holds
at least one cyan cell. That gate rejects unrelated tasks after a single
scan, so the reader runs solely for this task. The source-color map is a
balanced-tree association map and the erasable cells an ordered set, so
each lookup during the whole-grid render costs only a logarithmic step,
and the rule finishes far inside the ten-second per-task budget. A full
120-task run confirms the other 119 tasks are unchanged.

VERIFICATION

  cd /home/ccaitwo/Mentova
  swipl -g "consult('src/mentova/games/arc_benchmark_2'),
    consult('data/arc_agi_2/arc_tasks_2'),
    arc2_task('abc82100', Pairs, TI, TO),
    arc2_induce_rule(Pairs, Rule),
    arc2_transform(Rule, TI, C),
    (C = TO -> write('PASS') ; write('FAIL')), nl, halt"

Result: PASS. Full benchmark: 117/120 = 97.50%, zero regression.
