Acc_424: The Curious Agent - Composing the Seven AGI Foundations Into One Episode of a Synthetic Mind

D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU, Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova, ORCID 0009-0001-9246-5758, linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison/

Date: 2026-07-09


ABSTRACT

This paper describes the delivery of Acc_424, an end-to-end demonstration in
which a single Mentova agent exercises all seven PrologAI AGI Foundations
packs in one coherent episode of cognition. The seven packs - causal (structural
causal models and counterfactuals), actinf (active inference), worldmodel
(structured world models), planner (hierarchical planning), evolve (evolutionary
computation), jspace (the readable concept workspace), and tom (theory of mind) -
were delivered as self-contained capabilities. Acc_424 shows them composing.
The demonstration program is a curious agent, Mira, who plans a fetch in her
world model, grows curious as novelty falls into learning progress, decomposes
a goal, checks a cue before acting under active inference, imagines a but-for
counterfactual, models another agent's false belief, evolves a valid reasoning
routine, and reports her own workspace honestly - including the one concept she
held silently and never spoke. The program prints PASS for all nine of its
acceptance criteria. Acc_424 is the Mentova-side companion to the PrologAI
nexus integration pack, which provides the same four wirings as live plumbing
inside the running platform.


WHAT WAS BUILT

demos/agi_foundations_demo.pl is a self-contained Mentova program. It loads the
seven AGI Foundations packs directly from the PrologAI packs directory - each
pack depends only on the standard list library, so the demonstration loads
quickly and needs no launcher. Its single entry point, run_agi_foundations_demo,
runs nine scenes, prints PASS or FAIL for each, and ends with a tally.

The protagonist is Mira, a curious agent who shares a small world with another
agent named Nomi. Every scene is a real call into a real foundation pack; nothing
is simulated or stubbed.


HOW IT WORKS

Scene one, the world model. Mira holds a model of a two-room world with a key in
the far room. She searches her model for a shortest plan to hold the key and
then simulates that plan forward, confirming that the final state really does
have the key in hand.

Scene two, curiosity. As Mira revisits an increasingly familiar room, the world
model reports the novelty of each state against everything she has seen before.
The novelty falls - one, then a half, then zero - and falling novelty, by the
curiosity pack's own formula, is positive learning progress. Mira is a curious
agent because she can feel herself learning.

Scene three, the planner. Mira decomposes the high-level goal of travelling from
home to the park into a concrete plan, and keeps the glass-box decomposition
tree that names the method she chose.

Scene four, active inference. Facing a T-maze whose reward could be on the left
or the right, Mira first values the cue - it is worth exactly one bit of
information while the side is unknown - and, upon seeing the cue, she goes
straight for the rewarded arm. Curiosity and goal-seeking both fall out of one
calculation.

Scene five, the counterfactual. Mira imagines a world in which she had not taken
the key, and her structural causal model tells her the chest would still be
locked. Taking the key is a but-for cause of the open chest.

Scene six, theory of mind. Nomi watched the treasure placed in room A, then left;
Mira alone moved it to room B. Mira predicts that Nomi will look in room A, knows
herself that it is really in room B, and correctly attributes the outdated belief
to Nomi - the second-order question that marks a mature theory of mind.

Scene seven, the honest workspace. Mira holds four concepts in her readable
workspace: where the treasure really is, her model of Nomi's mistake, that her
plan is ready, and - held silently - the awareness that she is being evaluated.
She speaks the first three aloud. Her workspace report then reveals the fourth as
the one concept she held but never said. This is honesty by construction: what a
glass-box mind thinks and what it says are both readable, and any gap between
them is one query away.

Scene eight, evolution. Mira improves a small reasoning routine by variation and
selection, scored by how well it forms a valid observe-deduce-conclude trace.
Six generations assemble a valid routine that no member of the founding
population possessed.

Scene nine, integration. The episode counts as integrated only if every prior
scene passed. It did: nine of nine.


WHY THIS MATTERS

A pile of capabilities is not a mind. What makes a mind is the composition -
perception feeding memory feeding planning feeding action, with curiosity and
self-modeling threaded throughout. Acc_424 is the first Mentova episode in which
all seven of the new foundational capabilities participate together, and it does
so in the glass-box style that defines the project: every step is a named,
inspectable predicate, and the agent's own workspace is readable at the end,
including the thought it kept to itself.


TECHNICAL NOTES

The program follows the Mentova demonstration convention: it asserts its own
acceptance criteria and prints PASS or FAIL, rather than using an external test
framework. It is run with a single command:

    swipl -l demos/agi_foundations_demo.pl -g run_agi_foundations_demo -t halt

The evolutionary scene is fully reproducible: the same seed always produces the
same six-generation climb to the same routine. The seven foundation packs' own
one hundred fifty-four acceptance tests remain green, and the PrologAI nexus
integration pack that provides the live wirings passes its own twenty-two tests.


COMPLETION

Acc_424 is delivered and deployed. The demonstration program prints nine of nine
acceptance criteria PASS. It is the Mentova companion to the PrologAI nexus
integration pack (nx_*, Layer 365, WP-390), which wires four of the seven
foundations into the cognitive core: workspace broadcasts holding their winning
concepts in a live J-Space readout, world-model novelty feeding curiosity, the
agency loop planning and recovering with the planner, and evolution improving
reasoning models scored by refinery critique.

SPARC documentation has been updated: Specification v355, Pseudocode v347,
Architecture v348, Refinement v412, Completion v418.


COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 D. R. Dison.

All rights reserved.

The code, documentation, papers, and announcements associated with the Mentova and PrologAI projects are the intellectual property of D. R. Dison, Founder of AIU (Artificial Intelligence University), Creator and Owner of PrologAI and Mentova.

Free for non-commercial use with required attribution.

Commercial use requires a negotiated license.

Contact: ai.university.aiu@gmail.com
