ARC-AGI-3 GUIDED AND SOLO SUB-PROJECTS - WORK SUMMARY AND RESULTS

Version 1. Dated 2026-07-10.


PURPOSE OF THIS DOCUMENT

This document describes two new sub-projects added to the Mentova ARC-AGI-3 Chat page, and the buttons, dropdown, and record page that drive them.

ARC-AGI-3 stands for Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus for Artificial General Intelligence, version three.

It is a set of interactive games with no instructions, in which a player must explore, learn the rules, and reach the goal.

The two sub-projects are named ARC-AGI-3_Guided and ARC-AGI-3_Solo, and the key idea is that both of them see and read exactly the same learnings.

A note on honesty is made up front: no benchmark score is claimed anywhere in this work.


THE TWO SUB-PROJECTS

ARC-AGI-3_Guided is the human-in-the-loop sub-project.

It uses the ARC-AGI-3 Chat page to receive guidance from a human, who types clues like "that looks like a key" or "don't touch that."

Each clue is grounded into a Causalontology assertion, where Causalontology is Mentova's model of cause and effect, and injected into the live game so Mentova learns from it.

ARC-AGI-3_Solo is the unaided sub-project.

It takes everything the guided sessions taught - the learnings held in the data lattice, in the Causalontology relations, and in the Jacobian Space (J-Space) - and runs the game environments with no direct human direction.

The word solo here means Mentova plays alone, watched but not guided.

Both sub-projects are implemented as named modules that delegate to one shared backend, so that whatever the guided side learns, the solo side reads back and plays from.

The two module files are src slash mentova slash arc_agi_3_guided.pl and src slash mentova slash arc_agi_3_solo.pl.

Each exposes a predicate that reads all of the shared learnings at once - the taught goal, the suggested-action priorities, the declared hazards, the object labels, the count of learned causal relations, and the Jacobian Lens reading of the workspace - so that "seeing and reading all learnings" is a concrete, testable capability.


THE BUTTONS AND THE DROPDOWN

Four controls were added at the bottom of the ARC-AGI-3 Chat page.

• Button one, labelled Guided Mode.

◦ The chat is functional and working, and Mentova listens and learns from the chat.

◦ The ARC-AGI-3_Guided sub-project is the active one.

• Button two, labelled Solo Mode.

◦ The chat interface becomes greyed out, not clickable, and not usable, and any text that was in the chat is blanked out.

◦ The ARC-AGI-3_Solo sub-project becomes active.

◦ The upper half of the screen becomes a view-only window on what the system is doing, moment to moment.

◦ Each of Mentova's movements shows up as a light-up button press on the upper game interface.

• Button three, labelled Restart Game Environment.

◦ It works in both Guided Mode and Solo Mode, using whichever mode is active at the time.

◦ It starts at the beginning of the currently selected game environment.

◦ Every time Restart is pressed in Solo Mode, Mentova does the best it can and then writes a report.

• The drop-down list box, labelled Select ARC-AGI-3 Game Environment.

◦ It displays the list of all available ARC-AGI-3 game environments and lets the user select one to be active.

Below everything on the page is a link that reads "ARC-AGI-3 Solo Attempts Record."

Clicking that link opens a separate page that lists the date-and-time-stamped report files.

Clicking any of those file names opens that plain-text file for viewing in the web browser.


THE SOLO ATTEMPT REPORTS

When a solo attempt finishes, a plain-text report is written.

The report file name is date-and-time-stamped, for example ARC-AGI-3_Solo_2026-07-10_14-19-42.txt.

The reports are written to a subdirectory named ARC-AGI-3_Solo_Attempts.

A note on the folder name: the request wrote "Attemps," which is a small spelling slip for "Attempts," so the corrected spelling ARC-AGI-3_Solo_Attempts was used.

Each report records the game environment, the outcome, the number of steps, the moment-to-moment action trace, and the learnings the run drew on, including the Jacobian Lens reading.


THE GAME ENVIRONMENTS

Three local ARC-AGI-3-style environments were provided for the dropdown, each a working game.

• The environment labelled ls20 is the locksmith - find the key, then open the door.

◦ This is the fully-guided environment, the one the human clues are written for.

• The environment labelled vc33 is a navigation game - steer the avatar to the goal cell.

• The environment labelled ft09 is a signal game - raise a hidden counter until the level completes.

These are local stand-ins named after the public ARC-AGI-3 game codes; they let the whole page be exercised and tested without the live servers.


HOW THIS PLUGS INTO THE RUNNING SERVER

An important fix was made along the way.

The ARC-AGI-3 page's backend routes were previously loaded only by the acceptance demo, not by the running chat server.

The chat server file now loads the ARC-AGI-3 backend and both sub-projects, so the page and all its endpoints work on the live server at port 8088.

To run the server, from the Mentova directory:

bash bin/mentova_chat_start.sh 8088

Then open a web browser at http://localhost:8088/assets/arc/arc.html


RESULTS

Everything built here was tested, and the tests pass.

The acceptance demonstration checks six criteria and prints PASS for all six.

• Three ARC-AGI-3 game environments are selectable.

• The mode switches between Guided and Solo.

• Solo wins the signal game unaided and writes a report.

• After guided teaching, Solo uses the learnings to win the locksmith game, and its report records the taught goal.

• Both sub-projects read exactly the same shared learnings.

• The solo attempts list is populated and a report is viewable.

The clearest result is the fourth one.

A human first taught Mentova, in Guided Mode, that a cell is a key, that picking up is worth doing, and that the door is the goal.

Then, handed off to Solo Mode with no further input, Mentova used those learnings - the goal, the priority, and the labels held in the data lattice, the Causalontology, and the Jacobian Space - to win the locksmith level on its own.

A separate in-process web test confirmed that every new endpoint responds and that both the chat page and the attempts record page serve correctly.

The existing guided acceptance demonstration still passes all eight of its criteria, so nothing was broken.

To run the new demonstration, from the Mentova directory:

swipl -l demos/arc_solo_demo.pl -g run_arc_solo_demo -t halt


DEFAULTS CHOSEN, AND WHY

Because this work was carried out without stopping to ask questions, a few reasonable defaults were chosen, and they are recorded here.

• Entering Solo Mode begins a fresh attempt immediately, so the view-only window is lively rather than idle; pressing Restart begins another attempt.

• The solo action budget is sixty actions, after which the attempt ends and reports a best-effort result.

• Solo does its best with whatever it has learned; on an environment it was never guided on, it explores but may not win within budget, which is the honest behaviour the benchmark is designed to expose.

• No benchmark score is claimed, in keeping with the project rule of never announcing a result before it is measured.


WHAT REMAINS FOR LIVE PLAY

This work makes the Guided and Solo sub-projects fully functional on local game stand-ins.

For a live attempt, the environments would be replaced by the real ARC-AGI-3 environments through the guarded protocol adapter, and the solo player would be strengthened with the exploration policy and the goal gradient already built in the ARC-AGI-3 Readiness suite, so that it wins unguided environments more often.


END OF DOCUMENT
