ARC-AGI-3 PREPARATION - FINDINGS, WORK SUMMARY, AND RESULTS

Version 1. Dated 2026-07-10.


PURPOSE OF THIS DOCUMENT

This document records a complete piece of preparation work for the ARC-AGI-3 benchmark.

ARC-AGI-3 stands for Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus for Artificial General Intelligence, version three.

The word benchmark means a standard test that many different systems are measured against so their abilities can be compared fairly.

The work had four parts, and this document reports all four.

The first part was deep research into what ARC-AGI-3 actually is.

The second part was a decision about whether the PrologAI platform needed new capability packages, followed by building them.

The third part was a decision about whether Mentova, the synthetic mind built on PrologAI, needed new code, followed by building it.

The fourth part is this write-up of the findings, the decisions, and the measured results.

A note on honesty is made here at the very start, because it matters.

No benchmark score is claimed anywhere in this work.

This is preparation, not a measured result against the live competition, and PrologAI's rule is that a result is announced only after it has been achieved and measured, never ahead of the evidence.


PART ONE - WHAT ARC-AGI-3 IS

ARC-AGI-3 is called an Interactive Reasoning Benchmark.

It is made by the ARC Prize Foundation, which was co-founded by the researcher Francois Chollet and by Mike Knoop.

The earlier tests in this family, ARC-AGI-1 and ARC-AGI-2, showed a system a few before-and-after picture pairs and asked it to work out the hidden rule and apply it once.

ARC-AGI-3 is different in kind, not just in difficulty.

Instead of static puzzles, it is a set of small interactive games that an agent must play, turn by turn.

The word agent here means a program that senses a situation, chooses an action, sees what happens, and chooses again, over and over, pursuing a goal.

The defining feature of ARC-AGI-3 is that it gives the agent no instructions, no rules, and no stated goal.

To make any progress the agent must explore the game on its own, figure out how it works, discover what winning even looks like, and carry what it learns forward into later, harder levels.

The benchmark was previewed on 17 July 2025 with three games, a small contest, and an agents Application Programming Interface, where Application Programming Interface (API) means the defined way one program talks to another.

It launched fully on 25 March 2026, with a competition deadline of 2 November 2026 and results announced on 4 December 2026.

At launch the gap between people and machines was stark.

Human players solve one hundred percent of the environments.

The strongest frontier Artificial Intelligence models each scored under one percent - for example Google Gemini 3.1 Pro at about 0.37 percent, OpenAI GPT 5.4 at about 0.26 percent, and Anthropic Opus 4.6 at about 0.25 percent.

This is the widest human-versus-machine gap of any benchmark in the family, which is exactly why it is interesting.


THE SHAPE OF A GAME AND THE OBSERVATION FORMAT

Each environment is a turn-based game played on a grid.

A grid is simply a rectangle of coloured cells, like a checkerboard where each square can be one of several colours.

The grid is up to sixty-four cells wide and sixty-four cells tall, and each cell holds one of sixteen possible colours, written as the whole numbers zero through fifteen.

After each action the agent receives a frame, which is one snapshot of the grid, or sometimes a short sequence of frames showing an animation between turns.

The games deliberately rely only on what the ARC Prize Foundation calls Core Knowledge priors - basic ideas like objects being things, simple geometry, simple physics, and the notion of an agent that acts.

There is deliberately no language, no numbers to read, and no cultural symbols, so the test cannot be passed by memorised facts.


THE ACTION SPACE

The action space is the complete set of moves the agent is allowed to make.

For ARC-AGI-3 it is small and fixed.

The moves are as follows.

• Five simple actions, named ACTION1 through ACTION5. In many games ACTION1 through ACTION4 mean move up, down, left, and right, and ACTION5 is a general interact or select move, but the meaning is not told to the agent and must be discovered.

• One complex action, named ACTION6, which is a click at a chosen cell. It carries two numbers, an x coordinate and a y coordinate, each from zero to sixty-three, naming the column and the row of the clicked cell.

• An undo action, named ACTION7, which reverts the last turn in games that allow it.

• A reset action, named RESET, which restarts the level.

Because ACTION6 can click any of the sixty-four times sixty-four cells, a naive agent faces four thousand and ninety-six possible clicks every turn, which is far too many to try blindly.


THE PROTOCOL - HOW AN AGENT CONNECTS

The agent talks to the benchmark over the internet using a Representational State Transfer interface, where Representational State Transfer (REST) is a common style of web programming interface built on ordinary web requests.

Each command is sent as a web request to a path of the form slash api slash cmd slash COMMAND, for example slash api slash cmd slash ACTION6 for a click.

Data is exchanged as JavaScript Object Notation, where JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) is a simple text format of named fields, for example a click carries the fields x and y.

A session is wrapped by a scorecard, opened at slash api slash scorecard slash open and closed at slash api slash scorecard slash close, which records how the agent did.

Each reply reports the game state as one of four values.

• NOT_PLAYED means the level has not been started.

• NOT_FINISHED means the level is in progress.

• WIN means the level has been won.

• GAME_OVER means the level has ended in failure.

WIN and GAME_OVER are the two terminal states, meaning the level is over, and only WIN counts as a win.

An optional key called ARC_API_KEY identifies the agent; without one an anonymous key is used.


HOW SCORING WORKS

ARC-AGI-3 rewards not just winning but winning efficiently.

The primary measure is how many levels the agent completes, and the number of actions it took is the tie-breaker between agents that complete the same levels.

Efficiency is scored against a human baseline, specifically the number of actions the second-best human took on that level.

The per-level score is computed as the smaller of one and the ratio of human actions to agent actions, and then that value is squared.

Squaring is a power-law penalty, which simply means that spending more actions than the human is punished sharply rather than gently.

So matching the human earns a full score of one, while taking twice as many actions as the human earns only one quarter.

A whole environment's score is a weighted average of its level scores, with the earliest levels given the least weight.

The total score is the average of all environment scores, reported as a percentage from zero to one hundred.

To stop brute-force search from buying a win, the benchmark caps spending at about five times the human action count on each level.

An agent that ignores efficiency can therefore complete every level and still score close to zero.


WHAT WORKED FOR OTHER TEAMS

The research also looked at what actually succeeded during the preview contest, because that evidence shaped the design decisions later in this document.

The two strongest agents did not win by abstract cleverness; they won by exploring well.

The winning agent used a small Convolutional Neural Network with a Reinforcement Learning method, where Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a kind of pattern-recognising network and Reinforcement Learning (RL) is learning by trial and reward, to predict which actions would change the picture, so it stopped wasting turns on actions that did nothing.

The runner-up built a graph of the game states it had already seen and pruned away actions that only led back into loops it had already visited.

A common failure mode was agents that brute-forced blindly, some producing tens of gigabytes of replay files, and language-model-only agents that crashed often and achieved little.

The clear lesson is that good, frugal exploration and a memory of visited states are worth more than raw model size.


PART TWO - THE PROLOGAI DECISION AND WORK

Before deciding what to build, the existing state of both code bases was examined carefully so that nothing already present would be duplicated.

PrologAI already contained a package, called co_arc3, that provides the core game loop for interactive environments.

A package in PrologAI is a self-contained, versioned unit of capability; the project calls each one a work package, abbreviated Work Package (WP).

The co_arc3 package closes what it calls the perceive-learn-plan-act loop: it turns a frame into facts, turns the change between two frames into a learned cause-and-effect relation, chooses an action by planning first and being curious second, never repeats an action it has learned is harmful, and keeps a fully readable trace of every step.

It also has a deliberately loose bridge to the live web interface, kept loose on purpose because the exact web addresses change between releases.

Reading the co_arc3 code closely revealed four capabilities that the benchmark demands but that the bare loop leaves for the caller to supply.

• It chose actions only by how few times each had been tried, with no preference for actions likely to change the world and no memory of states already visited - exactly the behaviours the two strongest preview agents relied on.

• It never generated a concrete click for the ACTION6 action, so the large click space was not handled.

• It required the goal to be handed in, with no way to infer the unstated win condition for itself.

• It had no notion of efficiency, human baseline, action budget, or the benchmark's scoring, and its live bridge even encoded the click with the older action-five convention rather than the current ACTION6.

The decision, therefore, was that PrologAI did need new packs, and four were built, one for each gap, each building on co_arc3 rather than replacing it.

The four packs share the co_ family name prefix of the Causalontology suite they extend, and they take the next free work package and layer numbers, Work Packages 397 through 400 at Layers 372 through 375.

The first new pack is co_explore, the exploration policy.

It remembers each state it has seen by a compact, order-free signature made of the grid size and the count of each colour, so that returning to a state is recognised as a loop rather than mistaken for progress.

It ranks the available actions so that an action the learned cause-and-effect graph predicts will change the frame is always preferred to one predicted to do nothing, and among equals the least-tried action wins, while a known hazard is never chosen.

For the ACTION6 click it does not try all four thousand cells; it looks at the objects in the frame and offers only their centre points as click targets, shrinking the click space to a handful of sensible places.

The second new pack is co_goalinfer, the goal inference.

It watches the frame changes that happen just before a WIN reply and adds up support for the colours those winning changes introduced, so that across several wins the real target colour stands out while incidental changes cancel.

A colour that also appears just before a GAME_OVER loss is discounted, so a feature common to both winning and losing is not mistaken for the goal.

It then offers its best guess both as a plain-language goal, reach a certain colour, and as the exact fact shape the planner can aim at, together with a confidence number.

The third new pack is co_effic, the efficiency governor.

It counts the actions spent on each level, holds the human baseline, turns that baseline into the five-times action budget, reports whether the agent is still within budget, and computes the benchmark's scores exactly - the squared human-to-agent ratio for a level, the weighted average for an environment, and the overall percentage.

The fourth new pack is co_arc3proto, the protocol vocabulary.

It pins down the exact March 2026 web interface as plain, inspectable facts: the mapping from each action to its command name, the web address of each command, the scorecard open and close addresses, the four game states, the sixty-four-cell and sixteen-colour frame limits, and a guarded adapter that packages all of this as an environment the co_arc3 loop can play directly.

Because it lives in one small file, a future change to the live interface is a one-file edit rather than a scattered hunt.


PART THREE - THE MENTOVA DECISION AND WORK

Mentova already had one piece of ARC-AGI-3 support, the mentova_arc_agi_3_chat application, in which a human guides Mentova to a win by typing clues.

What Mentova did not have was an agent that plays with no human help at all, which is what the benchmark actually measures.

The decision, therefore, was that Mentova did need new code: an autonomous agent driver that wires the four new PrologAI packs onto the co_arc3 loop.

The word autonomous here means acting on its own, without a person in the loop.

The new file is src slash mentova slash games slash arc_agi_3.pl, and it plugs into Mentova's existing Game-as-a-Body harness just like the other game drivers.

On each turn the driver asks the exploration policy to choose the next action, performs it, learns the cause-and-effect of the resulting change, feeds that change to the goal inferencer, counts the action against the efficiency budget, and remembers the new state so loops are recognised.

It ships with two environments.

One is a small built-in mock game whose hidden rule the agent has never seen, so the whole loop can be run and tested offline, without any network.

The other is a guarded wrapper around the exact live protocol, ready for the real benchmark, which never affects any offline test.

The driver also exposes what the agent decided - the inferred goal, the efficiency ledger, and the full readable step-by-step trace - so that its behaviour is glass-box, meaning every decision can be inspected and explained.


PART FOUR - RESULTS

Everything built here was tested, and the tests pass.

On the PrologAI side, the four new packs carry twenty-seven automated tests in total, and all twenty-seven pass.

• co_explore has six passing tests.

• co_goalinfer has five passing tests.

• co_effic has seven passing tests.

• co_arc3proto has nine passing tests.

The existing co_arc3 tests still pass unchanged, and all four new packs load together with the whole Causalontology suite without any clash.

On the Mentova side, the autonomous agent was run end to end against its built-in game, with no human help.

The result was a clean, unaided win.

• It won the level in three actions, having first tried the idle action once, then discovered that the transfer action changes the world, then used it to win.

• It inferred the unstated win condition correctly as reach colour three, at full confidence.

• It reported its efficiency honestly - three agent actions against a two-action human baseline gives a squared score of about 0.44.

• Its readable trace recorded every action in order, ending in the win.

The acceptance demonstration checks all of this automatically and prints PASS for all six of its criteria.

Mentova still boots correctly with the new driver wired into its start-up.


HOW TO RUN THE WORK

The autonomous agent demonstration can be run from the Mentova directory with the following command.

swipl -l demos/arc_agi_3_autoplay_demo.pl -g run_arc_agi_3_demo -t halt

Each of the four new PrologAI packs can be tested from the PrologAI directory by putting every pack's prolog folder on the library path and running its test file, for example the exploration pack as follows.

swipl -p library=PACKS -g "run_tests, halt" -t "halt(1)" packs/co_explore/test/test_co_explore.pl

In that command PACKS stands for the colon-separated list of every packs star prolog folder.


DEFAULTS CHOSEN, AND WHY

Because this work was carried out without stopping to ask questions, a few reasonable defaults were chosen, and they are recorded here for transparency.

• The four capabilities were built as four separate packs rather than one, so that each is small, independently testable, and independently reusable, matching the one-capability-per-pack style of the platform.

• The packs build on co_arc3 rather than replacing it, so no existing capability was disturbed.

• The Mentova driver ships a built-in mock game so the whole system can be proven offline, honestly, without depending on the live servers.

• The human efficiency baseline in the demonstration is set to a small illustrative value, because the true second-best-human action counts are known only to the benchmark and are not published per level.

• No benchmark score is claimed, in keeping with the project rule of never announcing a result before it is measured.


WHAT REMAINS FOR A LIVE ATTEMPT

This work makes Mentova ready to attempt ARC-AGI-3; it does not yet attempt it against the live servers.

The remaining steps for a genuine leaderboard attempt are the following.

• Obtain an ARC_API_KEY from the ARC Prize Foundation and confirm the live web addresses still match the protocol pack, adjusting the single protocol file if they have drifted.

• Run the autonomous agent against the three public games, named ft09, ls20, and vc33, and record the levels completed and the actions spent.

• Feed the real per-level results into the efficiency governor to compute honest scores, and only then, if the results warrant it, write them up as a measured accomplishment.

• Consider strengthening the exploration policy with the frame-change-prediction idea that won the preview, if the simple curiosity-plus-prediction policy proves too slow on the harder levels.


SOURCES CONSULTED

The research drew on the following public sources.

• ARC Prize, Announcing ARC-AGI-3, https://arcprize.org/blog/arc-agi-3-launch

• ARC Prize, ARC-AGI-3 Preview - 30-Day Learnings, https://arcprize.org/blog/arc-agi-3-preview-30-day-learnings

• ARC Prize, ARC-AGI-3 Technical Report, https://arcprize.org/media/ARC_AGI_3_Technical_Report.pdf and the article version at https://arxiv.org/html/2603.24621v1

• ARC-AGI-3 Documentation, https://docs.arcprize.org/ and the machine index at https://docs.arcprize.org/llms.txt and the games page at https://docs.arcprize.org/games

• The arc-agi-3 software package listing, https://pypi.org/project/arc-agi-3/

• DataCamp, ARC-AGI-3 - The New Interactive Reasoning Benchmark, https://www.datacamp.com/blog/arc-agi-3


REVISION NOTE - ADDITIONAL SOURCES SCANNED (2026-07-10)

This note was added after a follow-up review of six ARC Prize resources, to be honest about what the first version of this document did and did not cover, and to record anything new.

First, a straight answer about coverage of the six resources reviewed.

• The official page https://arcprize.org/arc-agi/3 was seen in searches but was not directly read for the first version.

◦ It has now been read.

◦ It adds framing but no new hard specifications: it describes ARC-AGI-3 as measuring skill-acquisition efficiency over time - planning horizons, memory compression, and updating beliefs as new evidence appears - and states that a score of one hundred percent means an agent beats every game as efficiently as humans, and that every environment is human-solvable.

• The GitHub organisation https://github.com/arcprize was not scanned for the first version of this document.

◦ Two of its repositories were later read for the separate live-connection work: the reference agent (ARC-AGI-3-Agents) and the toolkit (ARC-AGI), which is where the exact live protocol was confirmed.

◦ For this note, the remaining relevant repositories were read as well. The findings confirm and slightly extend what we had.

• The newsletter link https://arcprize.kit.com/bc80575d89 is only a sign-up landing page with no content, so there was nothing to learn from it.

• The Discord invite https://discord.gg/9b77dPAmcA cannot be read by a fetcher - it is an invitation that opens the Discord application - so it was not scanned.

• The X (formerly Twitter) page https://twitter.com/arcprize is behind a sign-in wall and could not be read.

• The YouTube channel https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_rdrp-QkrZn-ce9uCE-0EA is a JavaScript application that returned no readable video titles or description, so no text could be extracted.

What the newly-read GitHub repositories confirm and add.

• ARCEngine (the ARC-AGI-3 game engine) confirms the core specification directly from code: the camera - the visible grid - defaults to sixty-four by sixty-four; the default action set is the numeric identifiers one through six (ACTION1 through ACTION6); and a single action can return multiple frames when it triggers an animation.

◦ This matches this document's Part One and the live client we built, which flattens a multi-frame reply to the current grid.

◦ It also confirms that the undo action, ACTION7, is not part of the engine's default set of six - it is offered only by games that support it, which is exactly how our connector treats it.

• The official benchmarking agent (arc-agi-3-benchmarking) confirms the connection details we used: a key named ARC_API_KEY, and public game identifiers such as ls20. It also shows the ARC Prize's own agent driving frontier models from several providers.

• The Kaggle starter (ARC-AGI-3-Kaggle-Starter) reveals a competition-logistics detail we had not recorded: besides the direct web-interface leaderboard, ARC-AGI-3 is also run as a Kaggle competition (ARC Prize 2026), where an agent is packaged with the arc-agi Python package (which requires Python version 3.12) and submitted as a data file, with a limit of five submissions per day.

Effect on this preparation and on the code.

• Nothing in the new material contradicts the first version of this document or the code we built.

• The new material increases confidence: the sixty-four by sixty-four grid, the sixteen colours, the ACTION1 through ACTION6 action set with ACTION7 as an optional undo, and the multi-frame replies are all confirmed against the ARC Prize Foundation's own engine and agent code.

• The one genuinely new item is a second way to compete - the Kaggle track - which is worth knowing for a future live attempt, alongside the direct Application Programming Interface (API) leaderboard already described here.

• No code change is required as a result of this review.

Additional sources scanned for this note.

• ARC Prize, ARC-AGI-3 overview page, https://arcprize.org/arc-agi/3

• ARC Prize GitHub organisation, https://github.com/arcprize - in particular the repositories ARCEngine, arc-agi-3-benchmarking, and ARC-AGI-3-Kaggle-Starter (and, from the earlier live-connection work, ARC-AGI-3-Agents and the ARC-AGI toolkit).

• Not readable as text, and therefore not scanned: the newsletter sign-up page, the Discord invite, the X page (sign-in wall), and the YouTube channel (JavaScript application).


END OF DOCUMENT
